--- PAGE 29 ---
29 
 
 
THE NATURAL PHILOSOPHERS 
 
… nothing can come from nothing … 
 
When her mother got home from work that afternoon Sophie 
was sitting in the glider, pondering the possible connection between 
the philosophy course and Hilde Moller Knag, who would not be 
getting a birthday card from her father. 
Her mother called from the other end of the garden, “Sophie! 
There’s a letter for you!” 
She caught her breath. She had already emptied the mailbox, so 
the letter had to be from the philosopher. What on earth would she 
say to her mother? 
“There’s no stamp on it. It’s probably a love letter!” Sophie 
took the letter. 
“Aren’t you going to open it?” She had to find an excuse. 
“Have you ever heard of anyone opening a love letter with her 
mother looking over her shoulder?” 
Let her mother think it was a love letter. Although it was 
embarrassing enough, it would be even worse if her mother found 
out that she was doing a correspondence course with a complete 
stranger, a philosopher who was playing hide-and-seek with her. 
It was one of the little white envelopes. When Sophie got 
upstairs to her room, she found three new questions: 
 
Is there a basic substance that everything else is made of? 
Can water turn into wine? 
How can earth and water produce a live frog! 
 
Sophie found the questions pretty stupid, but nevertheless they kept 
buzzing around in her head all evening. She was still thinking about 
them at school the next day, examining them one by one. 
Could there be a “basic substance” that everything was made 
of? If there was some such substance, how could it suddenly turn 
into a flower or an elephant? 

--- PAGE 30 ---
30 
 
 
The same objection applied to the question of whether water 
could turn into wine. Sophie knew the parable of how Jesus turned 
water into wine, but she had never taken it literally. And if Jesus 
really had turned water into wine, it was because it was a miracle, 
something that could not be done normally. Sophie knew there was 
a lot of water, not only in wine but in all other growing things. But 
even if a cucumber was 95 percent water, there must be something 
else in it as well, because a cucumber was a cucumber, not water. 
And then there was the question about the frog. Her philosophy 
teacher had this really weird thing about frogs. 
Sophie could possibly accept that a frog consisted of earth and 
water, in which case the earth must consist of more than one kind of 
substance. If the earth consisted of a lot of different substances, it 
was obviously possible that earth and water together could produce 
a frog. That is, if the earth and the water went via frog spawn and 
tadpoles. Because a frog could not just grow out of a cabbage patch, 
however much you watered it. 
When she got home from school that day there was a fat 
envelope waiting for her in the mailbox. 
Sophie hid in the den just as she had done the other days. 
 
THE PHILOSOPHERS’ PROJECT 
 
Here we are again! We’ll go directly to today’s lesson without 
detours around white rabbits and the like. 
I’ll outline very broadly the way people have thought about 
philosophy, from the ancient Greeks right up to our own day. But 
we’ll take things in their correct order. 
Since some philosophers lived in a different age—and perhaps 
in a completely different culture from ours—it is a good idea to try 
and see what each philosopher’s project is. By this I mean that we 
must try to grasp precisely what it is that each particular philosopher 
is especially concerned with finding out. One philosopher might 
want to know how plants and animals came into being. Another 
might want to know whether there is a God or whether man has an 
immortal soul. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
31 
 
 
Once we have determined what a particular philosopher’s 
project is, it is easier to follow his line of thought, since no one 
philosopher concerns himself with the whole of philosophy. 
I said his line of thought—referring to the philosopher, because 
this is also a story of men. Women of the past were subjugated both 
as females and as thinking beings, which is sad because a great deal 
of very important experience was lost as a result. It was not until this 
century that women really made their mark on the history of 
philosophy. 
I do not intend to give you any homework—no difficult math 
questions, or anything like that, and conjugating English verbs is 
outside my sphere of interest. However, from time to time I’ll give 
you a short assignment. 
If you accept these conditions, we’ll begin. 
 
THE NATURAL PHILOSOPHERS 
 
The earliest Greek philosophers are sometimes called natural 
philosophers because they were mainly concerned with the natural 
world and its processes. 
We have already asked ourselves where everything comes 
from. Nowadays a lot of people imagine that at some time something 
must have come from nothing. This idea was not so widespread 
among the Greeks. For one reason or another, they assumed that 
“something” had always existed. 
How everything could come from nothing was therefore not the 
all-important question. On the other hand the Greeks marveled at 
how live fish could come from water, and huge trees and brilliantly 
colored flowers could come from the dead earth. Not to mention 
how a baby could come from its mother’s womb! 
The philosophers observed with their own eyes that nature was 
in a constant state of transformation. But how could such 
transformations occur? 
How could something change from being substance to being a 
living thing, for example? 

--- PAGE 32 ---
32 
 
 
All the earliest philosophers shared the belief that there had to 
be a certain basic substance at the root of all change. How they 
arrived at this idea is hard to say. We only know that the notion 
gradually evolved that there must be a basic substance that was the 
hidden cause of all changes in nature. There had to be “something” 
that all things came from and returned to. 
For us, the most interesting part is actually not what solutions 
these earliest philosophers arrived at, but which questions they 
asked and what type of answer they were looking for. We are more 
interested in how they thought than in exactly what they thought. 
We know that they posed questions relating to the 
transformations they could observe in the physical world. They were 
looking for the underlying laws of nature. They wanted to 
understand what was happening around them without having to turn 
to the ancient myths. And most important, they wanted to 
understand the actual processes by studying nature itself. This was 
quite different from explaining thunder and lightning or winter and 
spring by telling stories about the gods. 
So philosophy gradually liberated itself from religion. We 
could say that the natural philosophers took the first step in the 
direction of scientific reasoning, thereby becoming the precursors of 
what was to become science. 
Only fragments have survived of what the natural philosophers 
said and wrote. What little we know is found in the writings of 
Aristotle, who lived two centuries later. He refers only to the 
conclusions the philosophers reached. So we do not always know by 
what paths they reached these conclusions. But what we do know 
enables us to establish that the earliest Greek philosophers’ project 
concerned the question of a basic constituent substance and the 
changes in nature. 
 
THREE PHILOSOPHERS FROM MILETUS 
 
The first philosopher we know of is Thales, who came from Miletus, 
a Greek colony in Asia Minor. He traveled in many countries, 
including Egypt, where he is said to have calculated the height of a 
pyramid by measuring its shadow at the precise moment when the 

--- PAGE 33 ---
33 
 
 
length of his own shadow was equal to his height. He is also said to 
have accurately predicted a solar eclipse in the year 585 B.C. 
Thales thought that the source of all things was water. We do 
not know exactly what he meant by that, he may have believed that 
all life originated from water—and that all life returns to water again 
when it dissolves. 
During his travels in Egypt he must have observed how the 
crops began to grow as soon as the floods of the Nile receded from 
the land areas in the Nile Delta. Perhaps he also noticed that frogs 
and worms appeared wherever it had just been raining. 
It is likely that Thales thought about the way water turns to ice 
or vapor—and then turns back into water again. 
Thales is also supposed to have said that “all things are full of 
gods.” What he meant by that we can only surmise. Perhaps, seeing 
how the black earth was the source of everything from flowers and 
crops to insects and cockroaches, he imagined that the earth was 
filled with tiny invisible “life-germs.” One thing is certain—he was 
not talking about Homer’s gods. 
The next philosopher we hear of is Anaximander, who also 
lived in Miletus at about the same time as Thales. He thought that 
our world was only one of a myriad of worlds that evolve and 
dissolve in something he called the boundless. It is not so easy to 
explain what he meant by the boundless, but it seems clear that he 
was not thinking of a known substance in the way that Thales had 
envisaged. Perhaps he meant that the substance which is the source 
of all things had to be something other than the things created. 
Because all created things are limited, that which comes before and 
after them must be “boundless.” It is clear that this basic stuff could 
not be anything as ordinary as water. 
A third philosopher from Miletus was Anaximenes (c. 570—
526 B.C.). He thought that the source of all things must be “air” or 
“vapor.” Anaximenes was of course familiar with Tholes’ theory of 
water. But where does water come from? Anaximenes thought that 
water was con- densed air. We observe that when it rains, water is 
pressed from the air. When water is pressed even more, it becomes 
earth, he thought. He may have seen how earth and sand were 
pressed out of melting ice. He also thought that fire was rarefied air. 

--- PAGE 34 ---
34 
 
 
According to Anaxi- menes, air was therefore the origin of earth, 
water, and fire. 
It is not a far cry from water to the fruit of the earth. Perhaps 
Anaximenes thought that earth, air, and fire were all necessary to the 
creation of life, but that the source of all things was air or vapor. So, 
like Thales, he thought that there must be an underlying substance 
that is the source of all natural change. 
 
Nothing Can Come from Nothing 
 
These three Milesian philosophers all believed in the existence of a 
single basic substance as the source of all things. But how could one 
substance suddenly change into something else? We can call this the 
problem of change. 
From about 500 B.C., there was a group of philosophers in the 
Greek colony of Elea in Southern Italy. These “Eleatics” were 
interested in this question. 
The most important of these philosophers was Parmenides (c. 
540-480 B.C.). 
Parmenides thought that everything that exists had always 
existed. This idea was not alien to the Greeks. They took it more or 
less for granted that everything that existed in the world was 
everlasting. Nothing can come out of nothing, thought Parmenides. 
And nothing that exists can become nothing. 
But Parmenides took the idea further. He thought that there was 
no such thing as actual change. Nothing could become anything 
other than it was. 
Parmenides realized, of course, that nature is in a constant state 
of flux. He perceived with his senses that things changed. But he 
could not equate this with what his reason told him. When forced to 
choose between relying either on his senses or his reason, he chose 
reason. 
You know the expression “I’ll believe it when I see it.” But 
Parmenides didn’t even believe things when he saw them. He 
believed that our senses give us an incorrect picture of the world, a 
picture that does not tally with our reason. As a philosopher, he saw 
it as his task to expose all forms of perceptual illusion. 

--- PAGE 35 ---
35 
 
 
This unshakable faith in human reason is called rationalism. A 
rationalist is someone who believes that human reason is the primary 
source of our knowledge of the world. 
 
All Things Flow 
 
A contemporary of Parmenides was Heraditus (c. 540-480 B.C.), 
who was from Ephesus in Asia Minor. He thought that constant 
change, or flow, was in fact the mosf basic characteristic of nature. 
We could perhaps say that Heraclitus had more faith in what he 
could perceive than Parmenides did. 
“Everything flows,” said Heraclitus. Everything is in constant 
flux and movement, nothing is abiding. Therefore we “cannot step 
twice into the same river.” When I step into the river for the second 
time, neither I nor the river are the same. 
Heraclitus pointed out that the world is characterized by 
opposites. If we were never ill, we would not know what it was to 
be well. If we never knew hunger, we would take no pleasure in 
being full. If there were never any war, we would not appreciate 
peace. And if there were no winter, we would never see the spring. 
Both good and bad have their inevitable place in the order of 
things, Heraclitus believed. 
Without this constant interplay of opposites the world would 
cease to exist. 
“God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, 
hunger and satiety,” he said. 
He used the term “God,” but he was clearly not referring to the 
gods of the mythology. To Heraclitus, God—or the Deity—was 
something that embraced the whole world. Indeed, God can be seen 
most clearly in the constant transformations and contrasts of nature. 
Instead of the term “God,” Heraclitus often used the Greek 
word logos, meaning reason. Although we humans do not always 
think alike or have the same degree of reason, Heraclitus believed 
that there must be a kind of “universal reason” guiding everything 
that happens in nature. 
This “universal reason” or “universal law” is something 
common to us all, and something that everybody is guided by. And 

--- PAGE 36 ---
36 
 
 
yet most people live by their individual reason, thought Heraclitus. 
In general, he despised his fellow beings. “The opinions of most 
people,” he said, “are like the playthings of infants.” 
So in the midst of all nature’s constant flux and opposites, 
Heraclitus saw an Entity or one-ness. This “something,” which was 
the source of everything, he called God or logos. 
 
Four Basic Elements 
 
In one way, Parmenides and Heraclitus were the direct opposite of 
each other. 
Parmenides’ reason made it clear that nothing could change. 
Heraclitus’ sense perceptions made it equally clear that nature was 
in a constant state of change. Which of them was right? Should we 
let reason dictate or should we rely on our senses? 
Parmenides and Heraclitus both say two things: Parmenides 
says: 
a. that nothing can change, and 
b. that our sensory perceptions must therefore be unreliable. 
Heraclitus, on the other hand, says: 
a. that everything changes (“all things flow”), and 
b. that our sensory perceptions are reliable. 
 
Philosophers could hardly disagree more than that! But who was 
right? It fell to Empedocles (c. 490-430 B.C.) from Sicily to lead the 
way out of the tangle they had gotten themselves into. 
He thought they were both right in one of their assertions but 
wrong in the other. 
Empedocles found that the cause of their basic disagreement 
was that both philosophers had assumed the presence of only one 
element. If this were true, the gap between what reason dictates and 
what “we can see with our own eyes” would be unbridgeable. 
Water obviously cannot turn into a fish or a butterfly. In fact, 
water cannot change. Pure water will continue to be pure water. So 
Parmenides was right in holding that “nothing changes.” 
But at the same time Empedocles agreed with Heraclitus that 
we must trust the evidence of our senses. We must believe what we 

--- PAGE 37 ---
37 
 
 
see, and what we see is precisely that nature changes. 
Empedocles concluded that it was the idea of a single basic 
substance that had to be rejected. Neither water nor air alone can 
change into a rosebush or a butterfly. The source of nature cannot 
possibly be one single “element.” 
Empedocles believed that all in all, nature consisted of four 
elements, or “roots” as he termed them. These four roots were 
earth, air, fire, and water. 
All natural processes were due to the coming together and 
separating of these four elements. For all things were a 
mixture of earth, air, fire, and water, but in varying 
proportions. When a flower or an animal dies, he said, the 
four elements separate again. We can register these changes 
with the naked eye. But earth and air, fire and water remain 
everlasting, “untouched” by all the compounds of which they 
are part. So it is not correct to say that “everything” changes. 
Basically, nothing changes. What happens is that the four 
elements are combined and separated—only to be combined 
again. 
We can make a comparison to painting. If a painter only 
has one color—red, for instance—he cannot paint green 
trees. But if he has yellow, red, blue, and black, he can paint 
in hundreds of different colors because he can mix them in 
varying proportions. 
An example from the kitchen illustrates the same thing. If 
I only have flour, I have to be a wizard to bake a cake. But if 
I have eggs, flour, milk, and sugar, then I can make any 
number of different cakes. 
It was not purely by chance that Empedocles chose earth, 
air, fire, and water as nature’s “roots.” Other philosophers 
before him had tried to show that the primordial substance 
had to be either water, air, or fire. Thales and Anaximenes

--- PAGE 38 ---
38 
 
 
had pointed out that both water and air were essential elements 
in the physical world. The Greeks believed that fire was also 
essential. They observed, for example, the importance of the 
sun to all living things, and they also knew that both animals 
and humans have body heat. 
Empedocles might have watched a piece of wood burning. 
Something disintegrates. We hear it crackle and splutter. That is 
“water.” Something goes up in smoke. That is “air.” The “fire” we 
can see. Something also remains when the fire is extinguished. That 
is the ashes—or “earth.” 
After Empedocles’ clarification of nature’s transformations as 
the combination and dissolution of the four “roots,” something still 
remained to be explained. What makes these elements combine so 
that new life can occur? And what makes the “mixture” of, say, a 
flower dissolve again? 
Empedocles believed that there were two different forces at 
work in nature. He called them love and strife. Love binds things 
together, and strife separates them. 
He distinguishes between “substance” and “force.” This is 
worth noting. Even today, scientists distinguish between elements 
and natural forces. Modern science holds that all natural processes 
can be explained as the interaction between different elements and 
various natural forces. 
Empedocles also raised the question of what happens when we 
perceive something. 
How can I “see” a flower, for example? What is it that happens? 
Have you ever thought about it, Sophie? 
Empedocles believed that the eyes consist of earth, air, fire, and 
water, just like everything else in nature. So the “earth” in my eye 
perceives what is of the earth in my surroundings, the “air” perceives 
what is of the air, the “fire” perceives what is of fire, and the “water” 
what is of water. Had my eyes lacked any of the four substances, I 
would not have seen all of nature. 
 
Something of Everything in Everything 
 
Anaxagoras (500-428 B.C.) was another philosopher who could not 

--- PAGE 39 ---
39 
 
 
agree that one particular basic substance—water, for instance—
might be transformed into everything we see in the natural world. 
Nor could he accept that earth, air, fire, and water can be 
transformed into blood and bone. 
Anaxagoras held that nature is built up of an infinite number of 
minute particles invisible to the eye. Moreover, everything can be 
divided into even smaller parts, but even in the minutest parts there 
are fragments of all other things. If skin and bone are not a 
transformation of something else, there must also be skin and bone, 
he thought, in the milk we drink and the food we eat. ~~ 
A couple of present-day examples can perhaps illustrate 
Anaxagoras’ line of thinking. 
Modern laser technology can produce so-called holograms. If 
one of these holograms depicts a car, for example, and the hologram 
is fragmented, we will see a picture of the whole car even though we 
only have the part of the hologram that showed the bumper. This is 
because the whole subject is present in every tiny part. 
In a sense, our bodies are built up in the same way. If I loosen 
a skin cell from my finger, the nucleus will contain not only the 
characteristics of my skin: the same cell will also reveal what kind 
of eyes I have, the color of my hair, the number and type of my 
fingers, and so on. Every cell of the human body carries a blueprint 
of the way all the other cells are constructed. So there is “something 
of everything” in every single cell. The whole exists in each tiny 
part. 
Anaxagoras called these minuscule particles which have 
something of everything in them seeds. 
Remember that Empedocles thought that it was “love” that 
joined the elements together in whole bodies. Anaxagoras also 
imagined “order” as a kind of force, creating animals and humans, 
flowers and trees. He called this force mind or intelligence (nous). 
Anaxagoras is also interesting because he was the first 
philosopher we hear of in Athens. 
He was from Asia Minor but he moved to Athens at the age of 
forty. He was later accused of atheism and was ultimately forced to 
leave the city. Among other things, he said that the sun was not a 
god but a red-hot stone, bigger than the entire Peloponnesian 

--- PAGE 40 ---
40 
 
 
peninsula. 
Anaxagoras was generally very interested in astronomy. He 
believed that all heavenly bodies were made of the same substance 
as Earth. He reached this conclusion after studying a meteorite. This 
gave him the idea that there could be human life on other planets. 
He also pointed out that the Moon has no light of its own—its light 
comes from Earth, he said. He thought up an explanation for solar 
eclipses as well. 
P.S. Thank you for your attention, Sophie. It is not unlikely that 
you will need to read this chapter two or three times before you 
understand it all. But understanding will always require some effort. 
You probably wouldn’t admire a friend who was good at everything 
if it cost her no effort. 
The best solution to the question of basic substance and the 
transformations in nature must wait until tomorrow, when you will 
meet Democritus. I’ll say no more! 
 
Sophie sat in the den looking out into the garden through a little 
hole in the dense thicket. She had to try and sort out her thoughts 
after all she had read. 
It was as clear as daylight that plain water could never turn into 
anything other than ice or steam. 
Water couldn’t even turn into a watermelon, because even 
watermelons consisted of more than just water. But she was only 
sure of that because that’s what she had learned. Would she be 
absolutely certain, for example, that ice was only water if that wasn’t 
what she had learned? At least, she would have to have studied very 
closely how water froze to ice and melted again. 
Sophie tried once again to use her own common sense, and not 
to think about what she had learned from others. 
Parmenides had refused to accept the idea of change in any 
form. And the more she thought about it, the more she was 
convinced that, in a way, he had been right. His intelligence could 
not accept that “something” could suddenly transform itself into 
“something completely different.” It must have taken quite a bit of 
courage to come right out and say it, because it meant denying all 
the natural changes that people could see for themselves. Lots of 

--- PAGE 41 ---
41 
 
 
people must have laughed at him. 
And Empedocles must have been pretty smart too, when he 
proved that the world had to consist of more than one single 
substance. That made all the transformations of nature possible 
without anything actually changing. 
The old Greek philosopher had found that out just by reasoning. 
Of course he had studied nature, but he didn’t have the equipment 
to do chemical analysis the way scientists do nowadays. 
Sophie was not sure whether she really believed that the source 
of everything actually was earth, air, fire, and water. But after all, 
what did that matter? In principle, Empedocles was right. The only 
way we can accept the transformations we can see with our own 
eyes—without losing our reason—is to admit the existence of more 
than one single basic substance. 
Sophie found philosophy doubly exciting because she was able 
to follow all the ideas by using her own common sense—without 
having to remember everything she had learned at school. She 
decided that philosophy was not something you can learn; but 
perhaps you can learn to think philosophically. 
 
 

--- PAGE 42 ---
42 
 
 
Democritus 
 
…the most ingenious toy in the world… 
 
Sophie put all the typed pages from the unknown philosopher back 
into the cookie tin and put the lid on it. She crawled out of the den 
and stood for a while looking across the garden. She thought about 
what happened yesterday. Her mother had teased her about the “love 
letter” again at breakfast this morning. She walked quickly over to 
the mailbox to prevent the same thing from happening today. 
Getting a love letter two days in a row would be doubly 
embarrassing. 
There was another little white envelope! Sophie began to 
discern a pattern in the deliveries: every afternoon she would find a 
big brown envelope. While she read the contents, the philosopher 
would sneak up to the mailbox with another little white envelope. 
So now Sophie would be able to find out who he was. If it was 
a he! She had a good view of the mailbox from her room. If she 
stood at the window she would see the mysterious philosopher. 
White envelopes don’t just appear out of thin air! 
Sophie decided to keep a careful watch the following day. 
Tomorrow was Friday and she would have the whole weekend 
ahead of her. 
She went up to her room and opened the envelope. There was 
only one question today, but it was even dumber than the previous 
three: 
Why is Lego the most ingenious toy in the world? 
For a start, Sophie was not at all sure she agreed that it was. It 
was years since she had played with the little plastic blocks. 
Moreover she could not for the life of her see what Lego could 
possibly have to do with philosophy. 
But she was a dutiful student. Rummaging on the top shelf of 
her closet, she found a bag full of Lego blocks of all shapes and 
sizes. 
For the first time in ages she began to build with them. As she 
worked, some ideas began to occur to her about the blocks. 

--- PAGE 43 ---
43 
 
 
They are easy to assemble, she thought. Even though they are 
all different, they all fit together. 
They are also unbreakable. She couldn’t ever remember having 
seen a broken Lego block. All her blocks looked as bright and new 
as the day they were bought, many years ago. The best thing about 
them was that with Lego she could construct any kind of object. And 
then she could separate the blocks and construct something new. 
What more could one ask of a toy? Sophie decided that Lego 
really could be called the most ingenious toy in the world. But what 
it had to do with philosophy was beyond her. 
She had nearly finished constructing a big doll’s house. Much 
as she hated to admit it, she hadn’t had as much fun in ages. 
Why did people quit playing when they grew up? 
When her mother got home and saw what Sophie had been 
doing, she blurted out, “What fun! I’m so glad you’re not too grown 
up to play!” 
“I’m not playing!” Sophie retorted indignantly, “I’m doing a 
very complicated philosophical experiment!” 
Her mother sighed deeply. She was probably thinking about the 
white rabbit and the top hat. 
When Sophie got home from school the following day, there 
were several more pages for her in a big brown envelope. She took 
them upstairs to her room. She could not wait to read them, but she 
had to keep her eye on the mailbox at the same time. 
 
THE ATOM THEORY 
 
Here I am again, Sophie. Today you are going to hear about the 
last of the great natural philosophers. His name is Democritus (c. 
460-370 B.C.) and he was from the little town of Abdera on the 
northern Aegean coast. 
If you were able to answer the question about Lego blocks 
without difficulty, you should have no problem understanding what 
this philosopher’s project was. 
Democritus agreed with his predecessors that transformations 
in nature could not be due to the fact that anything actually 
“changed.” He therefore assumed that everything was built up of 

--- PAGE 44 ---
44 
 
 
tiny invisible blocks, each of which was eternal and immutable. 
Democritus called these smallest units atoms. 
The word “a-tom” means “un-cuttable.” For Democritus it was 
all-important to establish that the constituent parts that everything 
else was composed of could not be divided indefinitely into smaller 
parts. If this were possible, they could not be used as blocks. If atoms 
could eternally be broken down into ever smaller parts, nature would 
begin to dissolve like constantly diluted soup. 
Moreover, nature’s blocks had to be eternal—because nothing 
can come from nothing. In this, he agreed with Parmenides and the 
Eleatics. Also, he believed that all atoms were firm and solid. But 
they could not all be the same. If all atoms were identical, there 
would still be no satisfactory explanation of how they could 
combine to form everything from poppies and olive trees to goatskin 
and human hair. 
Democritus believed that nature consisted of an unlimited 
number and variety of atoms. Some were round and smooth, others 
were irregular and jagged. And precisely because they were so 
different they could join together into all kinds of different bodies. 
But however infinite they might be in number and shape, they were 
all eternal, immutable, and indivisible. 
When a body—a tree or an animal, for instance—died and 
disintegrated, the atoms dispersed and could be used again in new 
bodies. Atoms moved around in space, but because they had 
“hooks” and “barbs,” they could join together to form all the things 
we see around us. 
So now you see what I meant about Lego blocks. They have 
more or less the same properties as those which Democritus ascribed 
to atoms. And that is what makes them so much fun to build with. 
They are first and foremost indivisible. Then they have different 
shapes and sizes. They are solid and impermeable. They also have 
“hooks” and “barbs” so that they can be connected to form every 
conceivable figure. These connections can later be broken again so 
that new figures can be constructed from the same blocks. 
The fact that they can be used over and over is what has made 
Lego so popular. Each single Lego block can be part of a truck one 
day and part of a castle the day after. We could also say that lego 

--- PAGE 45 ---
45 
 
 
blocks are “eternal.” Children of today can play with the same 
blocks their parents played with when they were little. 
We can form things out of clay too, but clay cannot be used 
over and over, because it can be broken up into smaller and smaller 
pieces. These tiny pieces can never be joined together again to make 
something else. 
Today we can establish that Democritus’ atom theory was more 
or less correct. Nature really is built up of different “atoms” that join 
and separate again. A hydrogen atom in a cell at the end of my nose 
was once part of an elephant’s trunk. A carbon atom in my cardiac 
muscle was once in the tail of a dinosaur. 
In our own time, however, scientists have discovered that 
atoms can be broken into smaller “elemental particles.” We call 
these elemental particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. These 
will possibly someday be broken into even lesser particles. But 
physicists agree that somewhere along the line there has to be a limit. 
There has to be a “minimal part” of which nature consists. 
Democritus did not have access to modern electronic apparatus. 
His only proper equipment was his mind. But reason left him no real 
choice. Once it is accepted that nothing can change, that nothing can 
come out of nothing, and that nothing is ever lost, then nature must 
consist of infinitesimal blocks that can join and separate again. 
Democritus did not believe in any “force” or “soul” that could 
intervene in natural processes. The only things that existed, he 
believed, were atoms and the void. Since he believed in nothing but 
material things, we call him a materialist. 
According to Democritus, there is no conscious “design” in the 
movement of atoms. In nature, everything happens quite 
mechanically. This does not mean that everything happens 
randomly, for everything obeys the inevitable laws of necessity. 
Everything that happens has a natural cause, a cause that is inherent 
in the thing itself. Democritus once said that he would rather 
discover a new cause of nature than be the King of Persia. 
The atom theory also explains our sense perception, thought 
Democritus. When we sense something, it is due to the movement 
of atoms in space. When I see the moon, it is because “moon atoms” 
penetrate my eye. 

--- PAGE 46 ---
46 
 
 
But what about the “soul,” then? Surely that could not consist 
of atoms, of material things? Indeed it could. Democritus believed 
that the soul was made up of special round, smooth “soul atoms.” 
When a human being died, the soul atoms flew in all directions, and 
could then become part of a new soul formation. 
This meant that human beings had no immortal soul, another 
belief that many people share today. They believe, like Democritus, 
that “soul” is connected with brain, and that we cannot have any 
form of consciousness once the brain disintegrates. 
Democritus’s atom theory marked the end of Greek natural 
philosophy for the time being. He agreed with Heraclitus that 
everything in nature “flowed,” since forms come and go. But behind 
everything that flowed there were some eternal and immutable 
things that did not flow. Democritus called them atoms. 
During her reading Sophie glanced out of the window several 
times to see whether her mysterious correspondent had turned up at 
the mailbox. Now she just sat staring down the road, thinking about 
what she had read. She felt that Democritus’s ideas had been so 
simple and yet so ingenious. He had discovered the real solution to 
the problem of “basic substance” and “transformation.” This 
problem had been so complicated that philosophers had gone around 
puzzling over it for generations. And in the end Democritus had 
solved it on his own by using his common sense. 
Sophie could hardly help smiling. It had to be true that nature 
was built up of small parts that never changed. At the same time 
Heraclitus was obviously right in thinking that all forms in nature        
“flow.” Because everybody dies, animals die, even a mountain range 
slowly disintegrates. The point was that the mountain range is made 
up of tiny indivisible parts that never break up. 
At the same time Democritus had raised some new questions. 
For example, he had said that everything happened mechanically. 
He did not accept that there was any spiritual force in life—unlike 
Empedocles and Anaxagoras. Democritus also believed that man 
had no immortal soul. 
Could she be sure of that? 
She didn’t know. But then she had only just begun the 
philosophy course. 

