--- PAGE 55 ---
56 
 
 
SOCRATES 
 
... wisest is she who know she does not know… 
 
Sophie put on a summer dress and hurried down to the kitchen. Her 
mother was standing by the kitchen table. Sophie decided not to say 
anything about the silk scarf. 
“Did you bring in the newspaper?” she asked. Her mother 
turned. 
“Would you get it for me?” 
Sophie was out of the door in a flash, down the gravel path to 
the mailbox. 
Only the newspaper. She couldn’t expect an answer so soon, 
she supposed. On the front page of the paper she read something 
about the Norwegian UN battalion in Lebanon. 
The UN battalion ... wasn’t that the postmark on the card from 
Hilde’s father? But the postage stamp had been Norwegian. Maybe 
the Norwegian UN soldiers had their own post office with them. 
“You’ve become very interested in the newspaper,” said her 
mother drily when Sophie returned to the kitchen. 
Luckily her mother said no more about mailboxes and stuff, 
either during breakfast or later on that day. When she went shopping, 
Sophie took her letter about Fate down to the den. 
She was surprised to see a little white envelope beside the 
cookie tin with the other letters from the philosopher. Sophie was 
quite sure she had not put it there. 
This envelope was also wet around the edges. And it had a 
couple of deep holes in it, just like the one she had received 
yesterday. 
Had the philosopher been here? Did he know about her secret 
hiding place? Why was the envelope wet? 
All these questions made her head spin. She opened the letter 
and read the note: 
 
Dear Sophie, 
I read your letter with great interest—and not without 
some regret. I must unfortunately disappoint you with regard to 

--- PAGE 56 ---
57 
 
 
the invitation. We shall meet one day, but it will probably be 
quite a while before I can come in person to Captain’s Bend.I 
must add that from now on I will no longer be able to deliver 
the letters personally. It would be much too risky in the long 
run. In the future, letters will be delivered by my little 
messenger. On the other hand, they will be brought directly to 
the secret place in the garden. 
You may continue to contact me whenever you feel the 
need. When you do, put a pink envelope out with a cookie or a 
lump of sugar in it. When the messenger finds it, he will bring 
it straight to me. 
P.S. It is not pleasant to decline a young lady’s invitation 
to coffee, but sometimes it is a matter of necessity. 
P.P.S. If you should come across a red silk scarf anywhere, 
please take care of it. Sometimes personal property gets mixed 
up. Especially at school and places like that, and this is a 
philosophy school. 
Yours, Alberto Knox 
 
Sophie had lived for almost fifteen years, and had received quite a 
lot of letters in her young life, at least at Christmas and on birthdays. 
But this letter was the strangest one she had ever received. 
It had no postage stamp. It hadn’t even been put in the mailbox. 
It had been brought straight to Sophie’s top-secret hideout in the old 
hedge. The fact that it was wet in the dry spring weather was also 
most mystifying. 
The strangest thing of all was the silk scarf, of course. The 
philosopher must have another pupil. 
That was it. And this other pupil had lost a red silk scarf. Right. 
But how had she managed to lose it under Sophie’s bed? 
And Alberto Knox … what kind of a name was that? 
One thing was confirmed—the connection between the 
philosopher and Hilde Moller Knag. But that Hilde’s own father was 
now 
confusing 
their 
addresses—that 
was 
completely 
incomprehensible. 
Sophie sat for a long time thinking about what connection there 
could possibly be between Hilde and herself. Finally she gave up. 

--- PAGE 57 ---
58 
 
 
The philosopher had written that she would meet him one day. 
Perhaps she would meet Hilde too. 
She turned the letter over. She now saw that there were some 
sentences written on the back as well: 
 
Is there such a there such a thing as natural modesty? 
Wisest is she who knows she does not know... 
True insight comes from within. 
He who knows what is right will do right. 
 
Sophie knew that the short sentences that came in the white 
envelopes were intended to prepare her for the next big envelope, 
which would arrive shortly thereafter. She suddenly had an idea. If 
the “messenger” came to the den to deliver a brown envelope, 
Sophie could simply sit and wait for him. Or was it a her? She would 
definitely hang on to whoever it was until he or she told her more 
about the philosopher! The letter said that the “messenger” was 
little. Could it be a child? “Is there such a thing as natural modesty?” 
Sophie knew that “modesty” was an old-fashioned word for 
shyness—for example, about being seen naked. But was it really 
natural to be embarrassed about that? If something was natural, she 
supposed, it was the same for everybody. In many parts of the world 
it was completely natural to be naked. So it must be society that 
decides what you can and can’t do. When Grandma was young you 
certainly couldn’t sunbathe topless. But today, most people think it 
is “natural,” even though it is still strictly forbidden in lots of 
countries. Was this philosophy? Sophie wondered. 
The next sentence was: “Wisest is she who knows she does not 
know.” 
Wiser than who? If the philosopher meant that someone who 
realized that she didn’t know everything under the sun was wiser 
than someone who knew just a little, but who thought she knew a 
whole lot—well, that wasn’t so difficult to agree with. Sophie had 
never thought about it before. But the more she did, the more clearly 
she saw that knowing what you don’t know is also a kind of 
knowledge. The stupidest thing she knew was for people to act like 
they knew all about things they knew absolutely nothing about. 

--- PAGE 58 ---
59 
 
 
The next sentence was about true insight coming from within. 
But didn’t all knowledge come into people’s heads from the outside? 
On the other hand, Sophie could remember situations when her 
mother or the teachers at school had tried to teach her something that 
she hadn’t been receptive to. And whenever she had really learned 
something, it was when she had somehow contributed to it herself. 
Now and then, even, she would suddenly understand a thing she’d 
drawn a total blank on before. That was probably what people meant 
by “insight.” 
So far, so good. Sophie thought she had done reasonably well 
on the first three questions. But the next statement was so odd she 
couldn’t help smiling: “He who knows what is right will do right.” 
Did that mean that when a bank robber robbed a bank it was 
because he didn’t know any better? 
Sophie didn’t think so. 
On the contrary, she thought that both children and adults did 
stupid things that they probably regretted afterwards, precisely 
because they had done them against their better judgment. 
While she sat thinking, she heard something rustling in the dry 
undergrowth on the other side of the hedge nearest the woods. Could 
it be the messenger? Her heart started beating faster. It sounded like 
a panting animal was coming. 
The next moment a big Labrador pushed its way into the 
den. In its mouth it held a big brown envelope which it dropped at 
Sophie’s feet. It all happened so quickly that Sophie had no time to 
react. A second later she was sitting with the big envelope in her 
hands—and the golden Labrador had scampered off into the woods 
again. 

--- PAGE 59 ---
60 
 
 
Once it was all over she reacted. She started to cry. She sat like 
that for a while, losing all sense of time. Then she looked up 
suddenly. 
So that was his famous messenger! Sophie breathed a sigh of 
relief. Of course that was why the white envelopes were wet around 
the edges and had holes in them. Why hadn’t she thought of it? Now 
it made sense to put a cookie or a lump of sugar in the envelope 
when she wrote to the philosopher. 
She may not always have been as smart as she would like, but 
who could have guessed that the messenger was a trained dog! It 
was a bit out of the ordinary, to put it mildly! She could certainly 
forget all about forcing the messenger to reveal Alberto Knox’s 
whereabouts. 
Sophie opened the big envelope and began to read. 
 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ATHENS 
 
Dear Sophie, When you read this you may already have met Hermes. 
In case you haven’t, I’ll add that he is a dog. But don’t worry. He is 
very good-tempered—and moreover, a good deal more intelligent 
than a lot of people. In any event he never tries to give the 
impression of being cleverer than he is. 
You may also note that his name is not without significance. 
In Greek mythology, Hermes was the messenger of the gods. 
He was also the god of seafarers, but we shall not bother about that, 
at least not for the moment. It is more important that Hermes also 
gave his name to the word “hermetic,” which means hidden or 
inaccessible— not inappropriate for the way Hermes takes care to 
keep the two of us hidden from each other. 
So the messenger has herewith been introduced. Naturally he 
answers to his name and is altogether very well behaved. 
But to return to philosophy. We have already completed the 
first part of the course. I refer to the natural philosophers and their 
decisive break with the mythological world picture. Now we are 
going to meet the three great classical philosophers, Socrates, Plato, 
and Aristotle. 

--- PAGE 60 ---
61 
 
 
Each in his own way, these philosophers influenced the whole 
of European civilization. 
The natural philosophers are also called the pre-Socratics, 
because they lived before Socrates. Although Democritus died some 
years after Socrates, all his ideas belong to pre- Socratic natural 
philosophy. Socrates represents a new era, geographically as well as 
temporally. He was the first of the great philosophers to be born in 
Athens, and both he and his two successors lived and worked there. 
You may recall that Anaxagoras also lived in Athens for a while but 
was hounded out because he said the sun was a red-hot stone. 
(Socrates fared no better!) 
From the time of Socrates, Athens was the center of Greek 
culture. It is also important to note the change of character in the 
philosophical project itself as it progresses from natural philosophy 
to Socrates. But before we meet Socrates, let us hear a little about 
the so-called Sophists, who dominated the Athenian scene at the 
time of Socrates. 
Curtain up, Sophie! The history of ideas is like a drama in many 
acts. 
 
Man at the Center 
After about 450 B.C., Athens was the cultural center of the 
Greek world. From this time on, philosophy took a new direction. 
The natural philosophers had been mainly concerned with the nature 
of the physical world. This gives them a central position in the 
history of science. In Athens, interest was now focused on the 
individual and the individual’s place in society. 
Gradually a democracy evolved, with popular assemblies and 
courts of law. 
In order for democracy to work, people had to be educated 
enough to take part in the democratic process. We have seen in our 
own time how a young democracy needs popular enlightenment. For 
the Athenians, it was first and foremost essential to master the art of 
rhetoric, which means saying things in a convincing manner. 
A group of itinerant teachers and philosophers from the Greek 
colonies flocked to Athens. 

--- PAGE 61 ---
62 
 
 
They called themselves Sophists. The word “sophist” means a 
wise and informed person. In Athens, the Sophists made a living out 
of teaching the citizens for money. 
The Sophists had one characteristic in common with the natural 
philosophers: they were critical of the traditional mythology. But at 
the same time the Sophists rejected what they regarded as fruitless 
philosophical speculation. Their opinion was that although answers 
to philosophical questions may exist, man cannot know the truth 
about the riddles of nature and of the universe. In philosophy a view 
like this is called skepticism. 
But even if we cannot know the answers to all of nature’s 
riddles, we know that people have to learn to live together. The 
Sophists chose to concern themselves with man and his place in 
society. 
“Man is the measure of all things,” said the Sophist Protagoras 
(c. 485-410 B.C.). By that he meant that the question of whether a 
thing is right or wrong, good or bad, must always be considered in 
relation to a person’s needs. On being asked whether he believed in 
the Greek gods, he answered, “The question is complex and life is 
short.” A person who is unable to say categorically whether or not 
the gods or God exists is called an agnostic. 
The Sophists were as a rule men who had traveled widely and 
seen different forms of government. Both conventions and local 
laws in the city-states could vary widely. This led the Sophists to 
raise the question of what was natural and what was socially 
induced. By doing this, they paved the way for social criticism in 
the city-state of Athens. 
They could for example point out that the use of an expression 
like “natural modesty” is not always defensible, for if it is “natural” 
to be modest, it must be something you are born with, something 
innate. But is it really innate, Sophie—or is it socially induced? To 
someone who has traveled the world, the answer should be simple: 
It is not “natural”—or innate—to be afraid to show yourself naked. 
Modesty—or the lack of it—is first and foremost a matter of social 
convention. 
As you can imagine, the wandering Sophists created bitter 

--- PAGE 62 ---
63 
 
 
wrangling in Athens by pointing out that there were no absolute 
norms for what was right or wrong. 
Socrates, on the other hand, tried to show that some such norms 
are in fact absolute and universally valid. 
 
Who Was Socrates? 
Socrates (470-399 B.C.) is possibly the most enigmatic figure 
in the entire history of philosophy. He never wrote a single line. Yet 
he is one of the philosophers who has had the greatest influence on 
European thought, not least because of the dramatic manner of his 
death. 
We know he was born in Athens, and that he spent most of his 
life in the city squares and marketplaces talking with the people he 
met there. “The trees in the countryside can teach me nothing,” he 
said. He could also stand lost in thought for hours on end. 
Even during his lifetime he was considered somewhat 
enigmatic, and fairly soon after his death he was held to be the 
founder of any number of different philosophical schools of thought. 
The very fact that he was so enigmatic and ambiguous made it 
possible for widely differing schools of thought to claim him as their 
own. 
We know for a certainty that he was extremely ugly. He was 
potbellied, and had bulging eyes and a snub nose. But inside he was 
said to be “perfectly delightful.” It was also said of him that “You 
can seek him in the present, you can seek him in the past, but you 
will never find his equal.” Nevertheless he was sentenced to death 
for his philosophical activities. 
The life of Socrates is mainly known to us through the writings 
of Plato, who was one of his pupils and who became one of the 
greatest philosophers of all time. Plato wrote a number of Dialogues, 
or dramatized discussions on philosophy, in which he uses Socrates 
as his principal character and mouthpiece. 
Since Plato is putting his own philosophy in Socrates’ mouth, 
we cannot be sure that the words he speaks in the dialogues were 
ever actually uttered by him. So it is no easy matter to distinguish 
between the teachings of Socrates and the philosophy of Plato. 

--- PAGE 63 ---
64 
 
 
Exactly the same problem applies to many other historical persons 
who left no written accounts. The classic example, of course, is 
Jesus. We cannot be certain that the “historical” Jesus actually spoke 
the words that Matthew or Luke ascribed to him. Similarly, what the 
“historical” Socrates actually said will always be shrouded in 
mystery. 
But who Socrates “really” was is relatively unimportant. It is 
Plato’s portrait of Socrates that has inspired thinkers in the Western 
world for nearly 2,500 years. 
 
The Art of Discourse 
The essential nature of Socrates’ art lay in the fact that he did 
not appear to want to instruct people. On the contrary he gave the 
impression of one desiring to learn from those he spoke with. So 
instead of lecturing like a traditional schoolmaster, he discussed. 
Obviously he would not have become a famous philosopher 
had he confined himself purely to listening to others. Nor would he 
have been sentenced to death. But he just asked questions, especially 
to begin a conversation, as if he knew nothing. In the course of the 
discussion he would generally get his opponents to recognize the 
weakness of their arguments, and, forced into a corner, they would 
finally be obliged to realize what was right and what was wrong. 
Socrates, whose mother was a midwife, used to say that his art 
was like the art of the midwife. She does not herself give birth to the 
child, but she is there to help during its delivery. Similarly, Socrates 
saw his task as helping people to “give birth” to the correct insight, 
since real understanding must come from within. It cannot be 
imparted by someone else. And only the understanding that comes 
from within can lead to true insight. 
Let me put it more precisely: The ability to give birth is a 
natural characteristic. In the same way, everybody can grasp 
philosophical truths if they just use their innate reason. Using your 
innate reason means reaching down inside yourself and using what 
is there. 
By playing ignorant, Socrates forced the people he met to use 
their common sense. 

--- PAGE 64 ---
65 
 
 
Socrates could feign ignorance—or pretend to be dumber than 
he was. We call this Socratic irony. This enabled him to continually 
expose the weaknesses in people’s thinking. He was not averse to 
doing this in the middle of the city square. If you met Socrates, you 
thus might end up being made a fool of publicly. 
So it is not surprising that, as time went by, people found him 
increasingly exasperating, especially people who had status in the 
community. “Athens is like a sluggish horse,” he is reputed to have 
said, “and I am the gadfly trying to sting it into life.” 
(What do we do with gadflies, Sophie?) 
 
A Divine Voice 
It was not in order to torment his fellow beings that Socrates 
kept on stinging them. 
Something within him left him no choice. He always said that 
he had a “divine voice” inside him. Socrates protested, for example, 
against having any part in condemning people to death. He 
moreover refused to inform on his political enemies. This was 
eventually to cost him his life. 
In the year 399 B.C. he was accused of “introducing new gods 
and corrupting the youth,” as well as not believing in the accepted 
gods. With a slender majority, a jury of five hundred found him 
guilty. 
He could very likely have appealed for leniency. At least he 
could have saved his life by agreeing to leave Athens. But had he 
done this he would not have been Socrates. He valued his 
conscience—and the truth— higher than life. He assured the jury 
that he had only acted in the best interests of the state. He was 
nevertheless condemned to drink hemlock. Shortly thereafter, he 
drank the poison in the presence of his friends, and died. 
Why, Sophie? Why did Socrates have to die? People have been 
asking this question for 2,400 years. However, he was not the only 
person in history to have seen things through to the bitter end and 
suffered death for the sake of their convictions. 
I have mentioned Jesus already, and in fact there are several 
striking parallels between them. 

--- PAGE 65 ---
66 
 
 
Both Jesus and Socrates were enigmatic personalities, also to 
their contemporaries. 
Neither of them wrote down their teachings, so we are forced 
to rely on the picture we have of them from their disciples. But we 
do know that they were both masters of the art of discourse. They 
both spoke with a characteristic self-assuredness that could fascinate 
as well as exasperate. And not least, they both believed that they 
spoke on behalf of something greater than themselves. They 
challenged the power of the community by criticizing all forms of 
injustice and corruption. And finally—their activities cost them their 
lives. 
The trials of Jesus and Socrates also exhibit clear parallels. 
They could certainly both have saved themselves by appealing 
for mercy, but they both felt they had a mission that would have 
been betrayed unless they kept faith to the bitter end. And by 
meeting their death so bravely they commanded an enormous 
following, also after they had died. 
I do not mean to suggest that Jesus and Socrates were alike. I 
am merely drawing attention to the fact that they both had a message 
that was inseparably linked to their personal courage. 
 
A Joker in Athens 
Socrates, Sophie! We aren’t done with him yet. We have talked 
about his method. But what was his philosophical project? 
Socrates lived at the same time as the Sophists. Like them, he 
was more concerned with man and his place in society than with the 
forces of nature. As a Roman philosopher, Cicero, said of him a few 
hundred years later, Socrates “called philosophy down from the sky 
and es- tablished her in the towns and introduced her into homes and 
forced her to investigate life, ethics, good and evil.” 
But Socrates differed from the Sophists in one significant way. 
He did not consider himself to be a “sophist”—that is, a learned or 
wise person. Unlike the Sophists, he did not teach for money. No, 
Socrates called himself a philosopher in the true sense of the word. 
A “philosopher” really means “one who loves wisdom.” 
Are you sitting comfortably, Sophie? Because it is central to 

--- PAGE 66 ---
67 
 
 
the rest of this course that you fully understand the difference 
between a sophist and a philosopher. The Sophists took money for 
their more or less hairsplitting expoundings, and sophists of this 
kind have come and gone from time immemorial. I am referring to 
all the schoolmasters and self-opinionated know-it-alls who are 
satisfied with what little they know, or who boast of knowing a 
whole lot about subjects they haven’t the faintest notion of. You 
have probably come across a few of these sophists in your young 
life. A real philosopher, Sophie, is a completely different kettle of 
fish—the direct opposite, in fact. A philosopher knows that in reality 
he knows very little. That is why he constantly strives to achieve 
true insight. Socrates was one of these rare people. He knew that he 
knew nothing about life and about the world. And now comes the 
important part:  it troubled him that he knew so little. 
A philosopher is therefore someone who recognizes that there 
is a lot he does not understand, and is troubled by it. In that sense, 
he is still wiser than all those who brag about their knowledge of 
things they know nothing about. “Wisest is she who knows she does 
not know,” I said previously. Socrates himself said, “One thing only 
I know, and that is that I know nothing.” 
Remember this statement, because it is an admission that is 
rare, even among philosophers. Moreover, it can be so dangerous to 
say it in public that it can cost you your life. The most subversive 
people are those who ask questions. Giving answers is not nearly as 
threatening. Any one question can be more explosive than a 
thousand answers. 
You remember the story of the emperor’s new clothes? The 
emperor was actually stark naked but none of his subjects dared say 
so. Suddenly a child burst out, “But he’s got nothing on!” That was 
a courageous child, Sophie. Like Socrates, who dared tell people 
how little we humans know. The similarity between children and 
philosophers is something we have already talked about. 
To be precise: Mankind is faced with a number of difficult 
questions that we have no satisfactory answers to. So now two 
possibilities present themselves: We can either fool ourselves and 
the rest of the world by pretending that we know all there is to know, 

--- PAGE 67 ---
68 
 
 
or we can shut our eyes to the central issues once and for all and 
abandon all progress. In this sense, humanity is divided. People are, 
generally speaking, either dead certain or totally indifferent. (Both 
types are crawling around deep down in the rabbit’s fur!) 
It is like dividing a deck of cards into two piles, Sophie. You 
lay the black cards in one pile and the red in the other. But from time 
to time a joker turns up that is neither heart nor club, neither 
diamond nor spade. Socrates was this joker in Athens. He was 
neither certain nor indifferent. All he knew was that he knew 
nothing—and it troubled him. So he became a philosopher—
someone who does not give up but tirelessly pursues his quest for 
truth. 
An Athenian is said to have asked the oracle at Delphi who the 
wisest man in Athens was. The oracle answered that Socrates of all 
mortals was the wisest. When Socrates heard this he was astounded, 
to put it mildly. (He must have laughed, Sophie!) He went straight 
to the person in the city whom he, and everyone else, thought was 
excessively wise. But when it turned out that this person was unable 
to give Socrates satisfactory answers to his questions, Socrates 
realized that the oracle had been right. 
Socrates felt that it was necessary to establish a solid 
foundation for our knowledge. He believed that this foundation lay 
in man’s reason. With his unshakable faith in human reason he was 
decidedly a rationalist. 
 
The Right Insight Leads to the Right Action 
As I have mentioned earlier, Socrates claimed that he was 
guided by a divine inner voice, and that this “conscience” told him 
what was right. “He who knows what good is will do good,” he said. 
By this he meant that the right insight leads to the right action. 
And only he who does right can be a “virtuous man.” When we do 
wrong it is because we don’t know any better. That is why it is so 
important to go on learning. Socrates was concerned with finding 
clear and universally valid definitions of right and wrong. Unlike the 
Sophists, he believed that the ability to distinguish between right and 
wrong lies in people’s reason and not in society. 

--- PAGE 68 ---
69 
 
 
You may perhaps think this last part is a bit too obscure, 
Sophie. Let me put it like this: Socrates thought that no one could 
possibly be happy if they acted against their better judgment. And 
he who knows how to achieve happiness will do so. Therefore, he 
who knows what is right will do right. Because why would anybody 
choose to be unhappy? 
What do you think, Sophie? Can you live a happy life if you 
continually do things you know deep down are wrong? There are 
lots of people who lie and cheat and speak ill of others. 
Are they aware that these things are not right—or fair, if you 
prefer? Do you think these people are happy? 
Socrates didn’t. 
When Sophie had read the letter, she quickly put it in the cookie 
tin and crawled out into the garden. She wanted to go indoors before 
her mother got back with the shopping in order to avoid any 
questions about where she had been. And she had promised to do 
the dishes. 
She had just filled the sink with water when her mother came 
staggering in with two huge shopping bags. Perhaps that was why 
her mother said, “You are rather preoccupied these days, Sophie.” 
Sophie didn’t know why she said it; the words just tumbled out 
of her mouth: “So was Socrates.” “Socrates?” 
Her mother stared at her, wide-eyed. 
“It was just so sad that he had to die as a result,” Sophie went 
on thoughtfully. “My goodness! Sophie! I don’t know what I’m to 
do!” 
“Neither did Socrates. All he knew was that he knew nothing. 
And yet he was the cleverest person in Athens.” 
Her mother was speechless. 
Finally she said, “Is this something you’ve learned at school?” 
Sophie shook her head energetically. 
“We don’t learn anything there. The difference between 
schoolteachers and philosophers is that school-teachers think they 
know a lot of stuff that they try to force down our throats. 
Philosophers try to figure things out together with the pupils.” 
“Now we’re back to white rabbits again! You know something? 

--- PAGE 69 ---
70 
 
 
I demand to know who your boyfriend really is. Otherwise I’ll begin 
to think he is a bit disturbed.” 
Sophie turned her back on the dishes and pointed at her mother 
with the dish mop. 
“It’s not him who’s disturbed. But he likes to disturb others—
to shake them out of their rut.” “That’s enough of that! I think he 
sounds a bit too impertinent.” Sophie turned back to the dishes. “He 
is neither impertinent nor pertinent,” said Sophie. “But he is trying 
to reach real wisdom. 
That’s the great difference between a real joker and all the other 
cards in the deck.” “Did you say joker?” 
Sophie nodded. “Have you ever thought about the fact that 
there are a lot of hearts and diamonds in a pack of cards? And a lot 
of spades and clubs. But there’s only one joker.” 
“Good grief, how you talk back, Sophie!” “And how you ask!” 
Her mother had put all the groceries away. Now she took the 
newspaper and went into the living room. Sophie thought she closed 
the door more loudly than usual. 
Sophie finished doing the dishes and went upstairs to her room. 
She had put the red silk scarf on the top shelf of the closet with the 
Lego blocks. She took it down and examined it carefully. 
Hilde ... 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 70 ---
71 
 
 
Athens 
 
... several tall buildings had risen from the ruins … 
 
Early that evening Sophie’s mother went to visit a friend. As soon 
as she was out of the house Sophie went down the garden to the den. 
There she found a thick package beside the big cookie tin. Sophie 
tore it open. It was a video cassette. 
She ran back to the house. A video tape! How on earth did the 
philosopher know they had a VCR? 
And what was on the cassette? 
Sophie put the cassette into the recorder. A sprawling city 
appeared on the TV screen. As the camera zoomed in on the 
Acropolis Sophie realized that the city must be Athens. She had 
often seen pictures of the ancient ruins there. 
It was a live shot. Summer-clad tourists with cameras slung 
about them were swarming among the ruins. One of them looked as 
if he was carrying a notice board. There it was again. Didn’t it say 
“Hilde”? 
After a minute or two there was a close-up of a middle-aged 
man. He was rather short, with a black, well-trimmed beard, and he 
was wearing a blue beret. He looked into the camera and said: 
“Welcome to Athens, Sophie. As you have probably guessed, I am 
Alberto Knox. If not, I will just reiterate that the big rabbit is still 
being pulled from the top hat of the universe. 
“We are standing at the Acropolis. The word means ‘citadel’—
or more precisely, ‘the city on the hill.’ People have lived up here 
since the Stone Age. The reason, naturally, was its unique location. 
The elevated plateau was easy to defend against marauders. From 
the Acropolis there was also an excellent view down to one of the 
best harbors in the Mediterranean. As the early Athens began to 
develop on the plain below the plateau, the Acropolis was used as a 
fortress and sacred shrine... During the first half of the fifth century 
B.C., a bitter war was waged against the Persians, and in 480 the 
Persian king Xerxes plundered Athens and burned all the old 
wooden buildings of the Acropolis. A year later the Persians were 

--- PAGE 71 ---
72 
 
 
defeated, and that was the beginning of the Golden Age of Athens. 
The Acropolis was rebuilt— prouder and more magnificent than 
ever—and now purely as a sacred shrine. 
“This was the period when Socrates walked through the streets 
and squares talking with the Athenians. He could thus have 
witnessed the rebirth of the Acropolis and watched the construction 
of all the proud buildings we see around us. And what a building site 
it was! Behind me you can see the biggest temple, the Parthenon, 
which means ‘the Virgin’s Place.’ It was built in honor of Athene, 
the patron goddess of Athens. The huge marble structure does not 
have a single straight line; all four sides are slightly curved to make 
the building appear less heavy. In spite of its colossal dimensions, it 
gives the impression of lightness. In other words, it presents an 
optical illusion. The columns lean slightly inwards, and would form 
a pyramid 1,500 meters high if they were continued to a point above 
the temple. The temple contained nothing but a twelve-meter-high 
statue of Athene. The white marble, which in those days was painted 
in vivid colors, was transported here from a mountain sixteen 
kilometers away.” 
Sophie sat with her heart in her mouth. Was this really the 
philosopher talking to her? She had only seen his profile that one 
time in the darkness. Could he be the same man who was now 
standing at the Acropolis in Athens? 
He began to walk along the length of the temple and the camera 
followed him. He walked right to the edge of the terrace and pointed 
out over the landscape. The camera focused on an old theater which 
lay just below the plateau of the Acropolis. 
“There you can see the old Dionysos Theater,” continued the 
man in the beret. “It is probably the very oldest theater in Europe. 
This is where the great tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and 
Euripides were performed during the time of Socrates. I referred 
earlier to the ill-fated King Oedipus. The tragedy about him, by 
Sophocles, was first performed here. But they also played comedies. 
The best known writer of comedies was Aristophanes, who also 
wrote a spiteful comedy about Socrates as the buffoon of Athens. 
Right at the back you can see the stone wall which the actors used 

--- PAGE 72 ---
73 
 
 
as a backdrop. It was called skene, and is the origin of our word 
‘scene.’ Incidentally, the word ‘theater’ comes from an old Greek 
word meaning ‘to see.’ But we must get back to the philosophers, 
Sophie. We are going around the Parthenon and down through the 
gateway ...” 
The little man walked around the huge temple and passed some 
smaller temples on his right. Then he began to walk down some 
steps between several tall columns. When he reached the foot of the 
Acropolis, he went up a small hill and pointed out toward Athens: 
“The hill we are standing on is called Areopagos. It was here that 
the Athenian high court of justice passed judgment in murder trials. 
Many hundreds of years later, St. Paul the Apostle stood here and 
preached about Jesus and Christianity to the Athenians. We shall 
return to what he said on a later occasion. Down to the left you can 
see the remains of the old city square in Athens, the agora. With the 
exception of the large temple to Hephaestos, the god of smiths and 
metalworkers, only some blocks of marble are preserved. Let us go 
down ...” 
 
 
The next moment he appeared among the ancient ruins. High 
up beneath the sky—at the top of Sophie’s screen—towered the 
monumental Athene temple on the Acropolis. Her philosophy 
teacher had seated himself on one of the blocks of marble. He looked 
into the camera and said: “We are sitting in the old agora in Athens. 
A sorry sight, don’t you think? Today, I mean. But once it was 
surrounded by splendid temples, courts of justice and other public 
offices, shops, a concert hall, and even a large gymnastics building. 
All situated around the square, which was a large open space ... The 
whole of European civilization was founded in this modest area. 
“Words such as politics and democracy, economy and history, 
biology and physics, mathematics and logic, theology and 
philosophy, ethics and psychology, theory and method, idea and 
system date back to the tiny populace whose everyday life centered 
around this square. This is where Socrates spent so much of his time 
talking to the people he met. He might have buttonholed a slave 

--- PAGE 73 ---
74 
 
 
bearing a jar of olive oil, and asked the unfortunate man a question 
on philosophy, for Socrates held that a slave had the same common 
sense as a man of rank. Perhaps he stood in an animated wrangle 
with one of the citizens—or held a subdued conversation with his 
young pupil Plato. It is extraordinary to think about. We still speak 
of Socratic or Platonic philosophy, but actually being Plato or 
Socrates is quite another matter.” 
Sophie certainly did think it was extraordinary to think about. 
But she thought it was just as extraordinary the way her philosopher 
was suddenly talking to her on a video that had been brought to her 
own secret hideout in the garden by a mysterious dog. 
The philosopher rose from the block of marble he was sitting 
on and said quietly: “It was actually my intention to leave it at that, 
Sophie. I wanted you to see the Acropolis and the remains of the old 
agora in Athens. But I am not yet sure that you have grasped just 
how splendid these surroundings once were ... so I am very tempted 
to go a bit further. It is quite irregular of course ... but I am sure I 
can count on it remaining just between the two of us. Oh well, a tiny 
glimpse will suffice anyway ...” 
He said no more, but remained standing there for a long time, 
staring into the camera. While he stood there, several tall buildings 
had risen from the ruins. As if by magic, all the old buildings were 
once again standing. 
Above the skyline Sophie could still see the Acropolis, but now 
both that and all the buildings down on the square were brand-new. 
They were covered with gold and painted in garish colors. Gaily 
dressed people were strolling about the square. Some wore swords, 
others carried jars on their heads, and one of them had a roll of 
papyrus under his arm. 
Then Sophie recognized her philosophy teacher. He was still 
wearing the blue beret, but now he was dressed in a yellow tunic in 
the same style as everyone else. He came toward Sophie, looked into 
the camera, and said: 
“That’s better! Now we are in the Athens of antiquity, Sophie. 
I wanted you to come here in person, you see. We are in the year 
402 B.C., only three years before Socrates dies. I hope you 

--- PAGE 74 ---
75 
 
 
appreciate this exclusive visit because it was very difficult to hire a 
video camera ...” 
Sophie felt dizzy. How could this weird man suddenly be in 
Athens 2,400 years ago? How could she be seeing a video film of a 
totally different age? There were no videos in antiquity ... so could 
this be a movie? 
But all the marble buildings looked real. If they had recreated 
all of the old square in Athens as well as the Acropolis just for the 
sake of a film—the sets would have cost a fortune. At any rate it 
would be a colossal price to pay just to teach Sophie about Athens. 
The man in the beret looked up at her again. 
“Do you see those two men over there under the colonnade?” 
Sophie noticed an elderly man in a crumpled tunic. He had a 
long unkempt beard, a snub nose, eyes like gimlets, and chubby 
cheeks. Beside him stood a handsome young man. 
“That is Socrates and his young pupil, Plato. You are going to 
meet them personally.” 
The philosopher went over to the two men, took off his beret, 
and said something which Sophie did not understand. It must have 
been in Greek. Then he looked into the camera and said, “I told them 
you were a Norwegian girl who would very much like to meet them. 
So now Plato will give you some questions to think about. But 
we must do it quickly before the guards discover us.” 
Sophie felt the blood pounding in her temples as the 
young man stepped forward and looked into the camera. 
“Welcome to Athens, Sophie,” he said in a gentle voice. 
He spoke with an accent. “My name is Plato and I am going 
to give you four tasks. First you must think over how a baker 
can bake fifty absolutely identical cookies. Then you can ask 
yourself why all horses are the same. Next you must decide 
whether you think that man has an immortal soul. And finally 
you must say whether men and women are equally sensible. 
Good luck!” 
Then the picture on the TV screen disappeared. Sophie 
wound and rewound the tape but she had seen all there was. 

--- PAGE 75 ---
76 
 
 
Sophie tried to think things through clearly. But as soon 
as she thought one thought, another one crowded in before 
she had thought the first one to its end. 
She had known from the start that her philosophy 
teacher was eccentric. But when he started to use teaching 
methods that defied all the laws of nature, Sophie thought he 
was going too far. 
Had she really seen Socrates and Plato on TV? Of 
course not, that was impossible. But it definitely wasn’t a 
cartoon. 
Sophie took the cassette out of the video recorder and 
ran up to her room with it. She put it on the top shelf with all 
the Lego blocks. Then she sank onto the bed, exhausted, and 
fell asleep. 
Some hours later her mother came into the room. She 
shook Sophie gently and said: “What’s the matter, Sophie?” 
“Mmmm?” 
“You’ve gone to sleep with all your clothes on!” Sophie 
blinked her eyes sleepily. 
“I’ve been to Athens,” she mumbled. That was all she 
could manage to say as she turned over and went back to 
sleep. 

--- PAGE 76 ---
77 
 
 
 
Plato 
 
… a longing to return to the realm of the soul… 
 
Sophie woke with a start early the next morning. She glanced at the 
clock. It was only a little after five but she was so wide awake that 
she sat up in bed. Why was she wearing a dress? Then she 
remembered everything. 
She climbed onto a stool and looked on the top shelf of the 
closet. Yes—there, at the back, was the video cassette. It hadn’t been 
a dream after all; at least, not all of it. 
But she couldn’t really have seen Plato and Socrates ... oh, 
never mind! She didn’t have the energy to think about it anymore. 
Perhaps her mother was right, perhaps she was acting a bit nuts these 
days. 
Anyway, she couldn’t go back to sleep. Perhaps she ought to 
go down to the den and see if the dog had left another letter. Sophie 
crept downstairs, put on a pair of jogging shoes, and went out. 
In the garden everything was wonderfully clear and still. The 
birds were chirping so energetically that Sophie could hardly keep 
from laughing. The morning dew twinkled in the grass like drops of 
crystal. Once again she was struck by the incredible wonder of the 
world. 
Inside the old hedge it was also very damp. Sophie saw no new 
letter from the philosopher, but nevertheless she wiped off one of 
the thick roots and sat down. 
She recalled that the video-Plato had given her some questions 
to answer. The first was something about how a baker could bake 
fifty identical cookies. 
Sophie had to think very carefully about that, because it 
definitely wouldn’t be easy. When her mother occasionally baked a 
batch of cookies, they were never all exactly the same. But then she 
was not an expert pastry cook; sometimes the kitchen looked as if a 
bomb had hit it. Even the cookies they bought at the baker’s were 
never exactly the same. Every single cookie was shaped separately 
in the baker’s hands. 

--- PAGE 77 ---
78 
 
 
 
 
Then a satisfied smile spread over Sophie’s face. She 
remembered how once she and her father went shopping while her 
mother was busy baking Christmas cookies. When they got back 
there were a lot of gingerbread men spread out on the kitchen table. 
Even though they weren’t all perfect, in a way they were all the 
same. And why was that? Obviously because her mother had used 
the same mold for all of them. 
Sophie felt so pleased with herself for having remembered the 
incident that she pronounced herself done with the first question. If 
a baker makes fifty absolutely identical cookies, he must be using 
the same pastry mold for all of them. And that’s that! 
Then the video-Plato had looked into the camera and asked why 
all horses were the same. But they weren’t, at all! On the contrary, 
Sophie thought no two horses were the same, just as no two people 
were the same. 
She was ready to give up on that one when she remembered 
what she had thought about the cookies. No one of them was exactly 
like any of the others. Some were a bit thicker than the others, and 
some were broken. But still, everyone could see that they were—in 
a way— “exactly the same.” 
What Plato was really asking was perhaps why a horse was 
always a horse, and not, for example, a cross between a horse and a 
pig. Because even though some horses were as brown as bears and 
others were as white as lambs, all horses had something in common. 
Sophie had yet to meet a horse with six or eight legs, for example. 
But surely Plato couldn’t believe that what made all horses 
alike was that they were made with the same mold? 
Then Plato had asked her a really difficult question. Does man 
have an immortal soul? That was something Sophie felt quite 
unqualified to answer. All she knew was that dead bodies were 
either cremated or buried, so there was no future for them. If man 
had an immortal soul, one would have to believe that a person 
consisted of two separate parts: a body that gets worn out after many 
years—and a soul that operates more or less independently of what 

--- PAGE 78 ---
79 
 
 
happens to the body. Her grandmother had said once that she felt it 
was only her body that was old. Inside she had always been the same 
young girl-The thought of the “young girl” led Sophie to the last 
question: Are women and men equally sensible? She was not so sure 
about that. It depended on what Plato meant by sensible. 
Something the philosopher had said about Socrates came into 
her mind. Socrates had pointed out that everyone could understand 
philosophical truths if they just used their common sense. He had 
also said that a slave had the same common sense as a nobleman. 
Sophie was sure that he would also have said that women had the 
same common sense as men. 
While she sat thinking, there was a sudden rustling in the 
hedge, and the sound of something puffing and blowing like a steam 
engine. The next second, the golden Labrador slipped into the den. 
It had a large envelope in its mouth. 
“Hermes!” cried Sophie. “Drop it! Drop it!” The dog dropped 
the envelope in Sophie’s lap, and Sophie stretched out her hand to 
pat the dog’s head. “Good boy, Hermes!” she said. The dog lay 
down and allowed itself to be patted. But after a couple of minutes 
it got up and began to push its way back through the hedge the same 
way it had come in. Sophie followed with the brown envelope in her 
hand. She crawled through the dense thicket and was soon outside 
the garden. 
Hermes had already started to run toward the edge of the 
woods, and Sophie followed a few yards behind. Twice the dog 
turned around and growled, but Sophie was not to be deterred. 
This time she was determined to find the philosopher—even if 
it meant running all the way to Athens. 
The dog ran faster and suddenly turned off down a narrow path. 
Sophie chased him, but after a few minutes he turned and faced her, 
barking like a watchdog. Sophie still refused to give up, taking the 
opportunity to lessen the distance between them. 
Hermes turned and raced down the path. Sophie realized that 
she would never catch up with him. She stood quite still for what 
seemed like an eternity, listening to him running farther and farther 
away. Then all was silent. 

