--- PAGE 79 ---
80 
 
 
She sat down on a tree stump by a little clearing in the woods. 
She still had the brown envelope in her hand. She opened it, drew 
out several typewritten pages, and began to read: 
 
PLATO’S ACADEMY 
Thank you for the pleasant time we spent together, Sophie. In 
Athens, I mean. So now I have at least introduced myself. And since 
I have also introduced Plato, we might as well begin without further 
ado. 
Plato (428-347 B.C.) was twenty-nine years old when Socrates 
drank the hemlock. He had been a pupil of Socrates for some time 
and had followed his trial very closely. The fact that Athens could 
condemn its noblest citizen to death did more than make a profound 
impression on him. It was to shape the course of his entire 
philosophic endeavor. 
To Plato, the death of Socrates was a striking example of the 
conflict that can exist between society as it really is and the true or 
ideal society. Plato’s first deed as a philosopher was to publish 
Socrates’ Apology, an account of his plea to the large jury. 
As you will no doubt recall, Socrates never wrote anything 
down, although many of the pre-Socratics did. The problem is that 
hardly any of their written material remains. But in the case of Plato, 
we believe that all his principal works have been preserved. (In 
addition to Socrates’ Apology, Plato wrote a collection of Epistles 
and about twenty-five philosophical Dialogues.) That we have these 
works today is due not least to the fact that Plato set up his own 
school of philosophy in a grove not far from Athens, named after 
the legendary Greek hero Academus. The school was therefore 
known as the Academy. (Since then, many thousands of 
“academies” have been established all over the world. We still speak 
of “academics” and “academic subjects.”) 
The subjects taught at Plato’s Academy were philosophy, 
mathematics, and gymnastics—although perhaps “taught” is hardly 
the right word. Lively discourse was considered most important at 
Plato’s Academy. So it was not purely by chance that Plato’s 
writings took the form of dialogues. 

--- PAGE 80 ---
81 
 
 
 
The Eternally True, Eternally Beautiful, and Eternally Good 
In the introduction to this course I mentioned that it could often 
be a good idea to ask what a particular philosopher’s project was. 
So now I ask: what were the problems Plato was concerned with? 
Briefly, we can establish that Plato was concerned with the 
relationship between what is eternal and immutable, on the one 
hand, and what “flows,” on the other. (Just like the pre-Socratics, in 
fact.) We’ve seen how the Sophists and Socrates turned their 
attention from questions of natural philosophy to problems related 
to man and society. And yet in one sense, even Socrates and the 
Sophists were preoccupied with the relationship between the eternal 
and immutable, and the “flowing.” They were interested in the 
problem as it related to human morals and society’s ideals or virtues. 
Very briefly, the Sophists thought that perceptions of what was right 
or wrong varied from one city-state to another, and from one 
generation to the next. So right and wrong was something that 
“flowed.” This was totally unacceptable to Socrates. He believed in 
the existence of eternal and absolute rules for what was right or 
wrong. By using our common sense we can all arrive at these 
immutable norms, since human reason is in fact eternal and 
immutable. 
Do you follow, Sophie? Then along comes Plato. He is 
concerned with both what is eternal and immutable in nature and 
what is eternal and immutable as regards morals and society. To 
Plato, these two problems were one and the same. He tried to grasp 
a “reality” that was eternal and immutable. And to be quite frank, 
that is precisely what we need philosophers for. We do not need 
them to choose a beauty queen or the day’s bargain in tomatoes. 
(This is why they are often unpopular!) Philosophers will try to 
ignore highly topical affairs and instead try to draw people’s 
attention to what is eternally “true,” eternally “beautiful,” and 
eternally “good.” 
We can thus begin to glimpse at least the outline of Plato’s 
philosophical project. But let’s take one thing at a time. We are 
attempting to understand an extraordinary mind, a mind that was to 

--- PAGE 81 ---
82 
 
 
have a profound influence on all subsequent European philosophy. 
 
The World of Ideas 
Both Empedocles and Democritus had drawn attention to the 
fact that although in the natural world everything “flows,” there 
must nevertheless be “something” that never changes (the “four 
roots,” or the “atoms”). Plato agreed with the proposition as such—
but in quite a different way. 
Plato believed that everything tangible in nature “flows.” So 
there are no “substances” that do not dissolve. Absolutely 
everything that belongs to the “material world” is made of a material 
that time can erode, but everything is made after a timeless “mold” 
or “form” that is eternal and immutable. 
You see? No, you don’t. 
Why are horses the same, Sophie? You probably don’t think 
they are at all. But there is something that all horses have in 
common, something that enables us to identify them as horses. A 
particular horse “flows,” naturally. It might be old and lame, and in 
time it will die. But the “form” of the horse is eternal and immutable. 
That which is eternal and immutable, to Plato, is therefore not 
a physical “basic substance,” as it was for Empedocles and 
Democritus. Plato’s conception was of eternal and immutable 
patterns, spiritual and abstract in their nature that all things are 
fashioned after. 
Let me put it like this: The pre-Socratics had given a reasonably 
good explanation of natural change without having to presuppose 
that anything actually “changed.” In the midst of nature’s cycle there 
were some eternal and immutable smallest elements that did not 
dissolve, they thought. Fair enough, Sophie! But they had no 
reasonable explanation for how these “smallest elements” that were 
once building blocks in a horse could suddenly whirl together four 
or five hundred years later and fashion themselves into a completely 
new horse. Or an elephant or a crocodile, for that matter. Plato’s 
point was that Democritus’ atoms never fashioned themselves into 
an “eledile” or a “crocophant.” This was what set his philosophical 
reflections going. 
If you already understand what I am getting at, you may skip 

--- PAGE 82 ---
83 
 
 
this next paragraph. But just in case, I will clarify: You have a box 
of Lego and you build a Lego horse. You then take it apart and put 
the blocks back in the box. You cannot expect to make a new horse 
just by shaking the box. How could Lego blocks of their own accord 
find each other and become a new horse again? No, you have to 
rebuild the horse, Sophie. And the reason you can do it is that you 
have a picture in your mind of what the horse looked like. The Lego 
horse is made from a model which remains unchanged from horse 
to horse. 
How did you do with the fifty identical cookies? Let us assume 
that you have dropped in from outer space and have never seen a 
baker before. You stumble into a tempting bakery— and there you 
catch sight of fifty identical gingerbread men on a shelf. I imagine 
you would wonder how they could be exactly alike. It might well be 
that one of them has an arm missing, another has lost a bit of its 
head, and a third has a funny bump on its stomach. But after careful 
thought, you would nevertheless conclude that all gingerbread men 
have something in common. Although none of them is perfect, you 
would suspect that they had a common origin. You would realize 
that all the cookies were formed in the same mold. And what is 
more, Sophie, you are now seized by the irresistible desire to see 
this mold. Because clearly, the mold itself must be utter perfection—
and in a sense, more beautiful—in comparison with these crude 
copies. 
If you solved this problem all by yourself, you arrived at the 
philosophical solution in exactly the same way that Plato did. 
Like most philosophers, he “dropped in from outer space.” (He 
stood up on the very tip of one of the fine hairs of the rabbit’s fur.) 
He was astonished at the way all natural phenomena could be so 
alike, and he concluded that it had to be because there are a limited 
number of forms “behind” everything we see around us. Plato called 
these forms ideas. Behind every horse, pig, or human being, there is 
the “idea horse,” “idea pig,” and “idea human being.” (In the same 
way, the bakery we spoke of can have gingerbread men, gingerbread 
horses, and gingerbread pigs. Because every self-respecting bakery 
has more than one mold. But one mold is enough for each type of 
gingerbread cookie.) 

--- PAGE 83 ---
84 
 
 
Plato came to the conclusion that there must be a reality behind 
the “material world.” He called this reality the world of ideas; it 
contained the eternal and immutable “patterns” behind the various 
phenomena we come across in nature. This remarkable view is 
known as Plato’s theory of ideas. 
 
True Knowledge 
I’m sure you’ve been following me, Sophie dear. But you may 
be wondering whether Plato was being serious. Did he really believe 
that forms like these actually existed in a completely different 
reality? 
He probably didn’t believe it literally in the same way for all 
his life, but in some of his dialogues that is certainly how he means 
to be understood. Let us try to follow his train of thought. 
A philosopher, as we have seen, tries to grasp something that is 
eternal and immutable. 
It would serve no purpose, for instance, to write a philosophic 
treatise on the existence of a particular soap bubble. Partly because 
one would hardly have time to study it in depth before it burst, and 
partly because it would probably be rather difficult to find a market 
for a philosophic treatise on something nobody has ever seen, and 
which only existed for five seconds. 
Plato believed that everything we see around us in nature, 
everything tangible, can be likened to a soap bubble, since nothing 
that exists in the world of the senses is lasting. We know, of course, 
that sooner or later every human being and every animal will die and 
decompose. Even a block of marble changes and gradually 
disintegrates. (The Acropolis is falling into ruin, Sophie! It is a 
scandal, but that’s the way it is.) Plato’s point is that we can never 
have true knowledge of anything that is in a constant state of change. 
We can only have opinions about things that belong to the world of 
the senses, tangible things. We can only have true knowledge of 
things that can be understood with our reason. 
All right, Sophie, I’ll explain it more clearly: a gingerbread man 
can be so lopsided after all that baking that it can be quite hard to 
see what it is meant to be. But having seen dozens of gingerbread 
men that were more or less successful, I can be pretty sure what the 

--- PAGE 84 ---
85 
 
 
cookie mold was like. I can guess, even though I have never seen it. 
It might not even be an advantage to see the actual mold with my 
own eyes because we cannot always trust the evidence of our senses. 
The faculty of vision can vary from person to person. On the other 
hand, we can rely on what our reason tells us because that is the 
same for everyone. 
If you are sitting in a classroom with thirty other pupils, and the 
teacher asks the class which color of the rainbow is the prettiest, he 
will probably get a lot of different answers. But if he asks what 8 
times 3 is, the whole class will—we hope—give the same answer. 
Because now reason is speaking and reason is, in a way, the direct 
opposite of “thinking so” or “feeling.” We could say that reason is 
eternal and universal precisely because it only expresses eternal and 
universal states. 
Plato found mathematics very absorbing because mathematical 
states never change. They are therefore states we can have true 
knowledge of. But here we need an example. 
Imagine you find a round pinecone out in the woods. Perhaps 
you say you “think” it looks completely round, whereas Joanna 
insists it is a bit flattened on one side. (Then you start arguing about 
it!) But you cannot have true knowledge of anything you can 
perceive with your eyes. On the other hand you can say with 
absolute certainty that the sum of the angles in a circle is 360 
degrees. In this case you would be talking about an ideal circle 
which might not exist in the physical world but which you can 
clearly visualize. (You are dealing with the hidden gingerbread-man 
mold and not with the particular cookie on the kitchen table.) 
In short, we can only have inexact conceptions of things we 
perceive with our senses. But we can have true knowledge of things 
we understand with our reason. The sum of the angles in a triangle 
will remain 180 degrees to the end of time. And similarly the “idea” 
horse will walk on four legs even if all the horses in the sensory 
world break a leg. 
An Immortal Soul 
As I explained, Plato believed that reality is divided into two 
regions. 
One region is the world of the senses, about which we can only 

--- PAGE 85 ---
86 
 
 
have approximate or incomplete knowledge by using our five 
(approximate or incomplete) senses. In this sensory world, 
“everything flows” and nothing is permanent. Nothing in the 
sensory world is, there are only things that come to be and pass 
away. 
The other region is the world of ideas, about which we can have 
true knowledge by using our reason. This world of ideas cannot be 
perceived by the senses, but the ideas (or forms) are eternal and 
immutable. 
According to Plato, man is a dual creature. We have a body that 
“flows,” is inseparably bound to the world of the senses, and is 
subject to the same fate as everything else in this world—a soap 
bubble, for example. All our senses are based in the body and are 
consequently unreliable. But we also have an immortal soul—and 
this soul is the realm of reason. And not being physical, the soul can 
survey the world of ideas. 
But that’s not all, Sophie. IT’S NOT ALL! 
Plato also believed that the soul existed before it inhabited the 
body, (it was lying on a shelf in the closet with all the cookie molds.) 
But as soon as the soul wakes up in a human body, it has forgotten 
all the perfect ideas. Then something starts to happen. In fact, a 
wondrous process begins. As the human being discovers the various 
forms in the natural world, a vague recollection stirs his soul. He 
sees a horse—but an imperfect horse. (A gingerbread horse!) The 
sight of it is sufficient to awaken in the soul a faint recollection of 
the perfect “horse,” which the soul once saw in the world of ideas, 
and this stirs the soul with a yearning to return to its true realm. Plato 
calls this yearning eras—which means love. The soul, then, 
experiences a “longing to return to its true origin.” From now on, 
the body and the whole sensory world is experienced as imperfect 
and insignificant. The soul yearns to fly home on the wings of love 
to the world of ideas. It longs to be freed from the chains of the body. 
Let me quickly emphasize that Plato is describing an ideal 
course of life, since by no means all humans set the soul free to begin 
its journey back to the world of ideas. Most people cling to the 
sensory world’s “reflections” of ideas. They see a horse—and 
another horse. But they never see that of which every horse is only 

--- PAGE 86 ---
87 
 
 
a feeble imitation. (They rush into the kitchen and stuff themselves 
with gingerbread cookies without so much as a thought as to where 
they came from.) What Plato describes is the philosophers’ way. His 
philosophy can be read as a description of philosophic practice. 
When you see a shadow, Sophie, you will assume that there 
must be something casting the shadow. You see the shadow of an 
animal. You think it may be a horse, but you are not quite sure. So 
you turn around and see the horse itself—which of course is 
infinitely more beautiful and sharper in outline than the blurred 
“horse-shadow.” Plato believed similarly that all natural phenomena 
are merely shadows of the eternal forms or ideas. But most people 
are content with a life among shadows. They give no thought to what 
is casting the shadows. They think shadows are all there are, never 
realizing even that they are, in fact, shadows. And thus they pay no 
heed to the immortality of their own soul. 
 
Out of the Darkness of the Cave 
Plato relates a myth which illustrates this. We call it the Myth 
of the Cave. I’ll retell it in my own words. 
Imagine some people living in an underground cave. They sit 
with their backs to the mouth of the cave with their hands and feet 
bound in such a way that they can only look at the back wall of the 
cave. Behind them is a high wall, and behind that wall pass human-
like creatures, holding up various figures above the top of the wall. 
Because there is a fire behind these figures, they cast flickering 
shadows on the back wall of the cave. So the only thing the cave 
dwellers can see is this shadow play. They have been sitting in this 
position since they were born, so they think these shadows are all 
there are. 
Imagine now that one of the cave dwellers manages to free 
himself from his bonds. The first thing he asks himself is where all 
these shadows on the cave wall come from. What do you think 
happens when he turns around and sees the figures being held up 
above the wall? To begin with he is dazzled by the sharp sunlight. 
He is also dazzled by the clarity of the figures because until now he 
has only seen their shadow. If he manages to climb over the wall 
and get past the fire into the world outside, he will be even more 

--- PAGE 87 ---
88 
 
 
dazzled. But after rubbing his eyes he will be struck by the beauty 
of everything. For the first time he will see colors and clear shapes. 
He will see the real animals and flowers that the cave shadows were 
only poor reflections of. But even now he will ask himself where all 
the animals and flowers come from. 
Then he will see the sun in the sky, and realize that this is what 
gives life to these flowers and animals, just as the fire made the 
shadows visible. 
The joyful cave dweller could now have gone skipping away 
into the countryside, delighting in his new-found freedom. But 
instead he thinks of all the others who are still down in the cave. He 
goes back. Once there, he tries to convince the cave dwellers that 
the shadows on the cave wall are but flickering reflections of “real” 
things. But they don’t believe him. They point to the cave wall and 
say that what they see is all there is. Finally they kill him. 
What Plato was illustrating in the Myth of the Cave is the 
philosopher’s road from shadowy images to the true ideas behind all 
natural phenomena. He was probably also think- ing of Socrates, 
whom the “cave dwellers” killed because he disturbed their 
conventional ideas and tried to light the way to true insight. The 
Myth of the Cave illustrates Socrates’ courage and his sense of 
pedagogic responsibility. 
Plato’s point was that the relationship between the darkness of 
the cave and the world beyond corresponds to the relationship 
between the forms of the natural world and the world of ideas. Not 
that he meant that the natural world is dark and dreary, but that it is 
dark and dreary in comparison with the clarity of ideas. A picture of 
a beautiful landscape is not dark and dreary either. But it is only a 
picture. 
 
 
The Philosophic State 
The Myth of the Cave is found in Plato’s dialogue the Republic. 
In this dialogue Plato also presents a picture of the “ideal state,” that 
is to say an imaginary, ideal, or what we would call a Utopian, state. 
Briefly, we could say that Plato believed the state should be 
governed by philosophers. He bases his explanation of this on the 

--- PAGE 88 ---
89 
 
 
construction of the human body. 
According to Plato, the human body is composed of three parts: 
the head, the chest, and the abdomen. For each of these three parts 
there is a corresponding faculty of the soul. 
Reason belongs to the head, will belongs to the chest, and 
appetite belongs to the abdomen. Each of these soul faculties also 
has an ideal, or “virtue.” Reason aspires to wisdom, Will aspires to 
courage, and Appetite must be curbed so that temperance can be 
exercised. Only when the three parts of the body function together 
as a unity do we get a harmonious or “virtuous” individual. At 
school, a child must first learn to curb its appetites, then it must 
develop courage, and finally reason leads to wisdom. 
Plato now imagines a state built up exactly like the tripartite 
human body. Where the body has head, chest, and abdomen, the 
State has rulers, auxiliaries, and fa-borers (farmers, for example). 
Here Plato clearly uses Greek medical science as his model. Just as 
a healthy and harmonious man exercises balance and temperance, 
so a “virtuous” state is characterized by everyone knowing their 
place in the overall picture. 
Like every aspect of Plato’s philosophy, his political 
philosophy is characterized by rationalism. The creation of a good 
state depends on its being governed with reason. Just as the head 
governs the body, so philosophers must rule society. 
Let us attempt a simple illustration of the relationship between 
the three parts of man and the state: 
 
BODY  
SOUL  
VIRTUE 
STATE 
Head 
 
reason  
wisdom  
rulers 
chest 
 
will 
 
courage  
auxiliaries 
abdomen 
appetite  
temperance 
laborers 
 
Plato’s ideal state is not unlike the old Hindu caste system, in 
.which each and every person has his or her particular function for 
the good of the whole. Even before Plato’s time the Hindu caste 
system had the same tripartite division between the auxiliary caste 
(or priest caste), the warrior caste, and the laborer caste. Nowadays 
we would perhaps call Plato’s state totalitarian. But it is worth 

--- PAGE 89 ---
90 
 
 
noting that he believed women could govern just as effectively as 
men for the simple reason that the rulers govern by virtue of their 
reason. Women, he asserted, have exactly the same powers of 
reasoning as men, provided they get the same training and are 
exempt from child rearing and housekeeping. In Plato’s ideal state, 
rulers and warriors are not allowed family life or private property. 
The rearing of children is considered too important to be left to the 
individual and should be the responsibility of the state. (Plato was 
the first philosopher to advocate state-organized nursery schools and 
full-time education.) 
After a number of significant political setbacks, Plato wrote the 
tows, in which he described the “constitutional state” as the next-
best state. He now reintroduced both private property and family 
ties. Women’s freedom thus became more restricted. However, he 
did say that a state that does not educate and train women is like a 
man who only trains his right arm. 
All in all, we can say that Plato had a positive view of women—
considering the time he lived in. In the dialogue Symposium, he 
gives a woman, the legendary priestess Diotima, the honor of having 
given Socrates his philosophic insight. 
So that was Plato, Sophie. His astonishing theories have been 
discussed—and criticized—for more than two thousand years. The 
first man to do so was one of the pupils from his own Academy. His 
name was Aristotle, and he was the third great philosopher from 
Athens. 
I’ll say no more! 
 
While Sophie had been reading about Plato, the sun had risen 
over the woods to the east. It was peeping over the horizon just as 
she was reading how one man clambered out of the cave and blinked 
in the dazzling light outside. 
It was almost as if she had herself emerged from an 
underground cave. Sophie felt that she saw nature in a completely 
different way after reading about Plato. It was rather like having 
been color-blind. She had seen some shadows but had not seen the 
clear ideas. 
She was not sure Plato was right in everything he had said about 

--- PAGE 90 ---
91 
 
 
the eternal patterns, but it was a beautiful thought that all living 
things were imperfect copies of the eternal forms in the world of 
ideas. Because wasn’t it true that all flowers, trees, human beings, 
and animals were “imperfect”? 
Everything she saw around her was so beautiful and so alive 
that Sophie had to rub her eyes to really believe it. But nothing she 
was looking at now would last. And yet—in a hundred years the 
same flowers and the same animals would be here again. Even if 
every single flower and every single animal should fade away and 
be forgotten, there would be something that “recollected” how it all 
looked. 
Sophie gazed out at the world. Suddenly a squirrel ran up the 
trunk of a pine tree. It circled the trunk a few times and disappeared 
into the branches. 
“I’ve seen you before!” thought Sophie. She realized that 
maybe it was not the same squirrel that she had seen previously, but 
she had seen the same “form.” For all she knew, Plato could have 
been right. Maybe she really had seen the eternal “squirrel” before—
in the world of ideas, before her soul had taken residence in a human 
body. 
Could it be true that she had lived before? Had her soul existed 
before it got a body to move around in? And was it really true that 
she carried a little golden nugget inside her—a jewel that cannot be 
corroded by time, a soul that would live on when her own body grew 
old and died? 
 
 

--- PAGE 91 ---
92 
 
 
The Major’s Cabin 
 
... the girl in the mirror winked with both eyes… 
 
It was only a quarter past seven. There was no need to hurry home. 
Sophie’s mother always took it easy on Sundays, so she would 
probably sleep for another two hours. 
Should she go a bit farther into the woods and try to find 
Alberto Knox? And why had the dog snarled at her so viciously? 
Sophie got up and began to walk down the path Hermes had 
taken. She had the brown envelope with the pages on Plato in her 
hand. Wherever the path diverged she took the wider one. 
Birds were chirping everywhere—in the trees and in the air, in 
bush and thicket. They were busily occupied with their morning 
pursuits. They knew no difference between weekdays and Sundays. 
Who had taught them to do all that? Was there a tiny computer inside 
each one of them, programming them to do certain things? 
The path led up over a little hill, then steeply down between tall 
pine trees. The woods were so dense now that she could only see a 
few yards between the trees. 
Suddenly she caught sight of something glittering between the 
pine trunks. It must be a little lake. The path went the other way but 
Sophie picked her way among the trees. Without really knowing 
why, she let her feet lead her. 
The lake was no bigger than a soccer field. Over on the other 
side she could see a red-painted cabin in a small clearing surrounded 
by silver birches. A faint wisp of smoke was rising from the 
chimney. 
Sophie went down to the water’s edge. It was very muddy in 
many places, but then she noticed a rowboat. It was drawn halfway 
out of the water. There was a pair of oars in it. 
Sophie looked around. Whatever she did, it would be 
impossible to get around the lake to the red cabin without getting 
her shoes soaked. She went resolutely over to the boat and pushed it 
into the water. Then she climbed aboard, set the oars in the rowlocks, 
and rowed across the lake. The boat soon touched the opposite bank. 

--- PAGE 92 ---
93 
 
 
Sophie went ashore and tried to pull the boat up after her. The bank 
was much steeper here than the opposite bank had been. 
She glanced over her shoulder only once before walking up 
toward the cabin. 
She was quite startled at her own boldness. How did she dare 
do this? She had no idea. It was as if “something” impelled her. 
Sophie went up to the door and knocked. She waited a while 
but nobody answered. She tried the handle cautiously, and the door 
opened. 
“Hallo!” she called. “Is anyone at home?” 
She went in and found herself in a living room. She dared not 
shut the door behind her. 
Somebody was obviously living here. Sophie could hear wood 
crackling in the old stove. Someone had been here very recently. 
On a big dining table stood a typewriter, some books, a couple 
of pencils, and a pile of paper. A smaller table and two chairs stood 
by the window that overlooked the lake. Apart from that there was 
very little furniture, although the whole of one wall was lined with 
bookshelves filled with books. 
Above a white chest of drawers hung a large round mirror in a 
heavy brass frame. It looked very old. 
On one of the walls hung two pictures. One was an oil painting 
of a white house which lay a stone’s throw from a little bay with a 
red boathouse. Between the house and the boathouse was a sloping 
garden with an apple tree, a few thick bushes, and some rocks. A 
dense fringe of birch trees framed the garden like a garland. The title 
of the painting was “Bjerkely.” 
Beside that painting hung an old portrait of a man sitting in a 
chair by a window. He had a book in his lap. This picture also had a 
little bay with trees and rocks in the background. It looked as though 
it had been painted several hundred years ago. The title of the picture 
was “Berkeley.” The painter’s name was Smibert. 
Berkeley and Bjerkely. How strange! 
Sophie continued her investigation. A door led from the living 
room to a small kitchen. Someone had just done the dishes. Plates 
and glasses were piled on a tea towel, some of them still glistening 
with drops of soapy water. There was a tin bowl on the floor with 

--- PAGE 93 ---
94 
 
 
some leftover scraps of food in it. Whoever lived here had a pet, a 
dog or a cat. 
Sophie went back to the living room. Another door led to a tiny 
bedroom. On the floor next to the bed there were a couple of 
blankets in a thick bundle. Sophie discovered some golden hairs on 
the blankets. Here was the evidence! Now Sophie knew that the 
occupants of the cabin were Alberto Knox and Hermes. 
Back in the living room, Sophie stood in front of the mirror. 
The glass was matte and scratched, and her reflection 
correspondingly blurred. Sophie began to make faces at herself like 
she did at home in the bathroom. Her reflection did exactly the same, 
which was only to be expected. 
But all of a sudden something scary happened. Just once—in 
the space of a split second—Sophie saw quite clearly that the girl in 
the mirror winked with both eyes. Sophie started back in fright. If 
she herself had winked—how could she have seen the other girl 
wink? And not only that, it seemed as though the other girl had 
winked at Sophie as if to say: I can see you, Sophie. I am in here, on 
the other side. 
Sophie felt her heart beating, and at the same time she heard a 
dog barking in the distance. 
Hermes! She had to get out of here at once. Then she noticed a 
green wallet on the chest of drawers under the mirror. It contained a 
hundred-crown note, a fifty, and a school I.D. card. It showed a 
picture of a girl with fair hair. Under the picture was the girl’s name: 
Hilde Moller Knag ... 
Sophie shivered. Again she heard the dog bark. She had to get 
out, at once! 
As she hurried past the table she noticed a white envelope 
between all the books and the pile of paper. It had one word written 
on it: SOPHIE. 
Before she had time to realize what she was doing, she grabbed 
the envelope and stuffed it into the brown envelope with the Plato 
pages. Then she rushed out of the door and slammed it behind her. 
The barking was getting closer. But worst of all was that the 
boat was gone. After a second or two she saw it, adrift halfway 
across the lake. One of the oars was floating beside it. All because 

--- PAGE 94 ---
95 
 
 
she hadn’t been able to pull it completely up on land. She heard the 
dog barking quite nearby now and saw movements between the trees 
on the other side of the lake. 
Sophie didn’t hesitate any longer. With the big envelope in her 
hand, she plunged into the bushes behind the cabin. Soon she was 
having to wade through marshy ground, sinking in several times to 
well above her ankles. But she had to keep going. She had to get 
home. 
Presently she stumbled onto a path. Was it the path she had 
taken earlier? She stopped to wring out her dress. And then she 
began to cry. 
How could she have been so stupid? The worst of all was the 
boat. She couldn’t forget the sight of the row-boat with the one oar 
drifting helplessly on the lake. It was all so embarrassing, so 
shameful. . . 
The philosophy teacher had probably reached the lake by now. 
He would need the boat to get home. Sophie felt almost like a 
criminal. But she hadn’t done it on purpose. 
The envelope! That was probably even worse. Why had she 
taken it? Because her name was on it, of course, so in a way it was 
hers. But even so, she felt like a thief. And what’s more, she had 
provided the evidence that it was she who had been there. 
Sophie drew the note out of the envelope. It said: 
 
What came first—the chicken or the “idea” chicken ? 
Are we born with innate “ideas”? What is the difference 
between a plant, an animal, and a human? 
Why does it rain? 
What does it take to live a good life? 
 
Sophie couldn’t possibly think about these questions right now, 
but she assumed they had something to do with the next philosopher. 
Wasn’t he called Aristotle? 
When she finally saw the hedge after running so far through the 
woods it was like swimming ashore after a shipwreck. The hedge 
looked funny from the other side. 
She didn’t look at her watch until she had crawled into the den. 

--- PAGE 95 ---
96 
 
 
It was ten-thirty. She put the big envelope into the biscuit tin with 
the other papers and stuffed the note with the new questions down 
her tights. 
Her mother was on the telephone when she came in. When she 
saw Sophie she hung up quickly. “Where on earth have you been?” 
“I... went for a walk ... in the woods,” she stammered. “So I 
see.” 
Sophie stood silently, watching the water dripping from her 
dress. “I called Joanna...” 
“Joanna?” 
Her mother brought her some dry clothes. Sophie only just 
managed to hide the philosopher’s note. Then they sat together in 
the kitchen, and her mother made some hot chocolate. 
“Were you with him?” she asked after a while. “Him?” 
Sophie could only think about her philosophy teacher. “With 
him, yes. Him.... your rabbit!” 
Sophie shook her head. 
“What do you do when you’re together, Sophie? Why are you 
so wet?” 
Sophie sat staring gravely at the table. But deep down inside 
she was laughing. Poor Mom, now she had that to worry about. 
She shook her head again. Then more questions came raining 
down on her. 
“Now I want the truth. Were you out all night? Why did you go 
to bed with your clothes on? Did you sneak out as soon as I had gone 
to bed? You’re only fourteen, Sophie. I demand to know who you 
are seeing!” 
Sophie started to cry. Then she talked. She was still frightened, 
and when you are frightened you usually talk. 
She explained that she had woken up very early and had gone 
for a walk in the woods. She told her mother about the cabin and the 
boat, and about the mysterious mirror. But she mentioned nothing 
about the secret correspondence course. Neither did she mention the 
green wallet. She didn’t quite know why, but she had to keep Hilde 
for herself. 
Her mother put her arms around Sophie, and Sophie knew that 
her mother believed her now. “I don’t have a boyfriend,” Sophie 

--- PAGE 96 ---
97 
 
 
sniffed. “It was just something I said because you were so upset 
about the white rabbit.” 
“And you really went all the way to the major’s cabin ...” said 
her mother thoughtfully. “The major’s cabin?” Sophie stared at her 
mother. 
“The little woodland cabin is called the major’s cabin because 
some years ago an army major lived there for a time. He was rather 
eccentric, a little crazy, I think. But never mind that. Since then the 
cabin has been unoccupied.” 
“But it isn’t! There’s a philosopher living there now.” “Oh stop, 
don’t start fantasizing again!” 
Sophie stayed in her room, thinking about what had happened. 
Her head felt like a roaring circus full of lumbering elephants, silly 
clowns, daring trapeze flyers, and trained monkeys. But one image 
recurred unceasingly— a small rowboat with one oar drifting in a 
lake deep in the woods—and someone needing the boat to get home. 
She felt sure that the philosophy teacher didn’t wish her any 
harm, and would certainly forgive her if he knew she had been to his 
cabin. But she had broken an agreement. That was all the thanks he 
got for taking on her philosophic education. How could she make up 
for it? Sophie took out her pink notepaper and began to write: 
Dear Philosopher, It was me who was in your cabin early 
Sunday morning. I wanted so much to meet you and discuss some 
of the philosophic problems. For the moment I am a Plato fan, but I 
am not so sure he was right about ideas or pattern pictures existing 
in another reality. Of course they exist in our souls, but I think—for 
the moment anyway— that this is a different thing. I have to admit 
too that I am not altogether convinced of the immortality of the soul. 
Personally, I have no recollections from my former lives. If you 
could convince me that my deceased grandmother’s soul is happy in 
the world of ideas, I would be most grateful. 
Actually, it was not for philosophic reasons that I started to 
write this letter (which I shall put in a pink envelope with a lump of 
sugar). I just wanted to say I was sorry for being disobedient. I tried 
to pull the boat completely up on shore but I was obviously not 
strong enough. Or perhaps a big wave dragged the boat out again. 
I hope you managed to get home without getting your feet wet. 

--- PAGE 97 ---
98 
 
 
If not, it might comfort you to know that I got soaked and will 
probably have a terrible cold. But that’ll be my own fault. 
I didn’t touch anything in the cabin, but I am sorry to say that I 
couldn’t resist the temptation to take the envelope that was on the 
table. It wasn’t because I wanted to steal anything, but as my name 
was on it, I thought in my confusion that it belonged to me. I am 
really and truly sorry, and I promise never to disappoint you again. 
P.S. I will think all the new questions through very carefully, 
starting now. 
P.P.S. Is the mirror with the brass frame above the white chest 
of drawers an ordinary mirror or a magic mirror? I’m only asking 
because I am not used to seeing my own reflection wink with both 
eyes. 
With regards from your sincerely interested pupil, SOPHIE 
Sophie read the letter through twice before she put it in the 
envelope. She thought it was less formal than the previous letter she 
had written. Before she went downstairs to the kitchen to get a lump 
of sugar she looked at the note with the day’s questions: 
“What came first—the chicken or the “idea” chicken? 
This question was just as tricky as the old riddle of the chicken 
and the egg. There would be no chicken without the egg, and no egg 
without the chicken. Was it really just as complicated to figure out 
whether the chicken or the “idea” chicken came first? Sophie 
understood what Plato meant. He meant that the “idea” chicken had 
existed in the world of ideas long before chickens existed in the 
sensory world. According to Plato, the soul had “seen” the “idea” 
chicken before it took up residence in a body. But wasn’t this just 
where Sophie thought Plato must be mistaken? How could a person 
who had never seen a live chicken or a picture of a chicken ever 
have any “idea” of a chicken? Which brought her to the next 
question: 
Are we born with innate “ideas”? Most unlikely, thought 
Sophie. She could hardly imagine a newborn baby being especially 
well equipped with ideas. One could obviously never be sure, 
because the fact that the baby had no language did not necessarily 
mean that it had no ideas in its head. But surely we have to see things 
in the world before we can know anything about them. 

--- PAGE 98 ---
99 
 
 
“What is the difference between a plant, an animal, and a 
human?” Sophie could immediately see very clear differences. 
For instance, she did not think a plant had a very complicated 
emotional life. Who had ever heard of a bluebell with a broken 
heart? A plant grows, takes nourishment, and produces seeds so that 
it can reproduce itself. That’s about all one could say about plants. 
Sophie concluded that everything that applied to plants also applied 
to animals and humans. But animals had other attributes as well. 
They could move, for example. (When did a rose ever run a 
marathon?) It was a bit harder to point to any differences between 
animals and humans. Humans could think, but couldn’t animals do 
so as well? 
Sophie was convinced that her cat Sherekan could think. At 
least, it could be very calculating. But could it reflect on 
philosophical questions? Could a cat speculate about the difference 
between a plant, an animal, and a human? Hardly! A cat could 
probably be either contented or unhappy, but did it ever ask itself if 
there was a God or whether it had an immortal soul? Sophie thought 
that was extremely doubtful. But the same problem was raised here 
as with the baby and the innate ideas. It was just as difficult to talk 
to a cat about such questions as it would be to discuss them with a 
baby. 
“Why does it rain?” Sophie shrugged her shoulders. It probably 
rains because seawater evaporates and the clouds condense into 
raindrops. Hadn’t she learnt that in the third grade? Of course, one 
could always say that it rains so that plants and animals can grow. 
But was that true? Had a shower any actual purpose? 
The last question definitely had something to do with purpose: 
“What does it take to live a good life?”  
The philosopher had written something about this quite early 
on in the course. Everybody needs food, warmth, love, and care. 
Such basics were the primary condition for a good life, at any rate. 
Then he had pointed out that people also needed to find answers to 
certain philosophical questions. It was probably also quite important 
to have a job you liked. If you hated traffic, for instance, you would 
not be very happy as a taxi driver. And if you hated doing homework 
it would probably be a bad idea to become a teacher. Sophie loved 

--- PAGE 99 ---
100 
 
 
animals and wanted to be a vet. But in any case she didn’t think it 
was necessary to win a million in the lottery to live a good life. 
Quite the opposite, more likely. There was a saying: The devil 
finds work for idle hands. 
Sophie stayed in her room until her mother called her down to 
a big midday meal. She had prepared sirloin steak and baked 
potatoes. There were cloudberries and cream for dessert. 
They talked about all kinds of things. Sophie’s mother asked 
her how she wanted to celebrate her fifteenth birthday. It was only a 
few weeks away. 
Sophie shrugged. 
“Aren’t you going to invite anyone? I mean, don’t you want to 
have a party?” “Maybe.” 
“We could ask Martha and Anne Marie ... and Helen. And 
Joanna, of course. And Jeremy, perhaps. But that’s for you to decide. 
I remember my own fifteenth birthday so clearly, you know. It 
doesn’t seem all that long ago. I felt I was already quite grown up. 
Isn’t it odd, Sophie! I don’t feel I have changed at all since then.” 
“You haven’t. Nothing changes. You have just developed, 
gotten older...” 
“Mm ... that was a very grownup thing to say. I just think it’s 
all happened so very quickly.” 

--- PAGE 100 ---
101 
 
 
Aristotle 
 
...a meticulous organizer who 
wanted to clarify our concepts … 
 
 
 
 
 
While her mother was taking her afternoon nap, Sophie went 
down to the den. She had put a lump of sugar in the pink envelope 
and written “To Alberto” on the outside. 
There was no new letter, but after a few minutes Sophie heard 
the dog approaching. 
“Hermes!” she called, and the next moment he had pushed his 
way into the den with a big brown envelope in his mouth. 
“Good boy!” Sophie put her arm around the dog, which was 
snorting and snuffling like a walrus. She took the pink envelope with 
the lump of sugar and put it in the dog’s mouth. He crawled through 
the hedge and made off into the woods again. 
Sophie opened the big envelope apprehensively, wondering 
whether it would contain anything about the cabin and the boat. 
It contained the usual typed pages held together with a 
paperclip. But there was also a loose page inside. On it was written: 
 
Dear Miss Sleuth, or, to be more exact, Miss Burglar. The case 
has already been handed over to the police. 
Not really. No, I’m not angry. If you are just as curious 
when it comes to discovering answers to the riddles of 
 
 

