--- PAGE 101 ---
102 
 
 
 philosophy, I’d say your adventure was very promising. It’s just 
a little annoying that I’ll have to move now. Still, I have no one 
to blame but myself, I suppose. I might have known you were a 
person who would always want to get to the bottom of things. 
Greetings, Alberto 
 
Sophie was relieved. So he was not angry after all. But why 
would he have to move? 
She took the papers and ran up to her room. It would be prudent 
to be in the house when her mother woke up. Lying comfortably on 
her bed, she began to read about Aristotle. 
 
PHILOSOPHER AND SCIENTIST 
 
Dear Sophie: 
You were probably astonished by Plato’s theory or ideas. You 
are not the only one! I do not know whether you swallowed the 
whole thing—hook, line, and sinker—or whether you had any 
critical comments. But if you did have, you can be sure that the self-
same criticism was raised by Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), who was a 
pupil at Plato’s Academy for almost twenty years. 
Aristotle was not a native of Athens. He was born in Macedonia 
and came to Plato’s Academy when Plato was 61. Aristotle’s father 
was a respected physician— and therefore a scientist. This 
background already tells us something about Aristotle’s philosophic 
project. 
What he was most interested in was nature study. He was not 
only the last of the great Greek philosophers, he was Europe’s first 
great biologist. 
Taking it to extremes, we could say that Plato was so engrossed 
in his eternal forms, or “ideas,” that he took very little notice of the 
changes in nature. Aristotle, on the other hand, was preoccupied 
with just these changes—or with what we nowadays describe as 
natural processes. 
To exaggerate even more, we could say that Plato turned his 
back on the sensory world and shut his eyes to everything we see 
around us. (He wanted to escape from the cave and look out over the 

--- PAGE 102 ---
103 
 
 
eternal world of ideas!) Aristotle did the opposite: he got down on 
all fours and studied frogs and fish, anemones and poppies. 
While Plato used his reason, Aristotle used his senses as well. 
We find decisive differences between the two, not least in their 
writing. Plato was a poet and mythologist; Aristotle’s writings were 
as dry and precise as an encyclopedia. On the other hand, much of 
what he wrote was based on up-to-the-minute field studies. 
Records from antiquity refer to 170 titles supposedly written by 
Aristotle. Of these, 47 are preserved. These are not complete books; 
they consist largely of lecture notes. In his time, philosophy was still 
mainly an oral activity. 
The significance of Aristotle in European culture is due not 
least to the fact that he created the terminology that scientists use 
today. He was the great organizer who founded and classified the 
various sciences. 
Since Aristotle wrote on all the sciences, I will limit myself to 
some of the most important areas. Now that I have told you such a 
lot about Plato, you must start by hearing how Aristotle refuted 
Plato’s theory of ideas. Later we will look at the way he formulated 
his own natural philosophy, since it was Aristotle who summed up 
what the natural philosophers before him had said. We’ll see how 
he categorizes our concepts and founds the discipline of Logic as a 
science. And finally I’ll tell you a little about Aristotle’s view of 
man and society. 
 
No Innate Ideas 
 
Like the philosophers before him, Plato wanted to find the 
eternal and immutable in the midst of all change. So he found the 
perfect ideas that were superior to the sensory world. 
Plato furthermore held that ideas were more real than all the 
phenomena of nature. First came the idea “horse,” then came all the 
sensory world’s horses trotting along like shadows on a cave wall. 
The idea “chicken” came before both the chicken and the egg. 
Aristotle thought Plato had turned the whole thing upside 
down. He agreed with his teacher that the particular horse “flows” 
and that no horse lives forever. He also agreed that the actual form 

--- PAGE 103 ---
104 
 
 
of the horse is eternal and immutable. But the “idea” horse was 
simply a concept that we humans had formed after seeing a certain 
number of horses. The “idea” or “form” horse thus had no existence 
of its own. To Aristotle, the “idea” or the “form” horse was made up 
of the horse’s characteristics—which define what we today call the 
horse species. 
To be more precise: by “form” horse, Aristotle meant that 
which is common to all horses. 
And here the metaphor of the gingerbread mold does not hold 
up because the mold exists independently of the particular 
gingerbread cookies. Aristotle did not believe in the existence of any 
such molds or forms that, as it were, lay on their own shelf beyond 
the natural world. On the contrary, to Aristotle the “forms” were in 
the things, because they were the particular characteristics of these 
things. 
So Aristotle disagreed with Plato that the “idea” chicken came 
before the chicken. What Aristotle called the “form” chicken is 
present in every single chicken as the chicken’s particular set 
characteristics—for one, that it lays eggs. The real chicken and the 
“form” chicken are thus just as inseparable as body and soul. 
And that is really the essence of Aristotle’s criticism of Plato’s 
theory of ideas. But you should not ignore the fact that this was a 
dramatic turn of thought. The highest degree of reality, in Plato’s 
theory, was that which we think with our reason. It was equally 
apparent to Aristotle that the highest degree of reality is that which 
we perceive with our senses. Plato thought that all the things we see 
in the natural world were purely reflections of things that ex- isted 
in the higher reality of the world of ideas—and thereby in the human 
soul. Aristotle thought the opposite: things that are in the human soul 
were purely reflections of natural objects. So nature is the real world. 
According to Aristotle, Plato was trapped in a mythical world 
picture in which the human imagination was confused with the real 
world. 
Aristotle pointed out that nothing exists in consciousness that 
has not first been experienced by the senses. Plato would have said 
that there is nothing in the natural world that has not first existed in 
the world of ideas. Aristotle held that Plato was thus “doubling the 

--- PAGE 104 ---
105 
 
 
number of things.” He explained a horse by referring to the “idea” 
horse. But what kind of an explanation is that, Sophie? Where does 
the “idea” horse come from, is my question. Might there not even 
be a third horse, which the “idea” horse is just an imitation of? 
Aristotle held that all our thoughts and ideas have come into 
our consciousness through what we have heard and seen. But we 
also have an innate power of reason. We have no innate ideas, as 
Plato held, but we have the innate faculty of organizing all sensory 
impressions into categories and classes. This is how concepts such 
as “stone,” “plant,” “animal,” and “human” arise. Similarly there 
arise concepts like “horse,” “lobster,” and “canary.” 
Aristotle did not deny that humans have innate reason. On the 
contrary, it is precisely reason, according to Aristotle, that is man’s 
most distinguishing characteristic. But our reason is completely 
empty until we have sensed something. So man has no innate 
“ideas.” 
 
The Form of a Thing Is Its Specific Characteristics 
 
Having come to terms with Plato’s theory of ideas, Aristotle decided 
that reality consisted of various separate things that constitute a 
unity of form and substance. The “substance” is what things are 
made of, while the “form” is each thing’s specific characteristics. 
A chicken is fluttering about in front of you, Sophie. The 
chicken’s “form” is precisely that it flutters—and that it cackles and 
lays eggs. So by the “form” of a chicken, we mean the specific 
characteristics of its species—or in other words, what it does. When 
the chicken dies—and cackles no more—its “form” ceases to exist. 
The only thing that remains is the chicken’s “substance” (sadly 
enough, Sophie), but then it is no longer a chicken. 
As I said earlier, Aristotle was concerned with the changes in 
nature. “Substance” always contains the potentiality to realize a 
specific “form.” We could say that “substance” always strives 
toward achieving an innate potentiality. Every change in nature, 
according to Aristotle, is a transformation of substance from the 
“potential” to the “actual.” 
Yes, I’ll explain what I mean, Sophie. See if this funny story 

--- PAGE 105 ---
106 
 
 
helps you. A sculptor is working on a large block of granite. He 
hacks away at the formless block every day. One day a little boy 
comes by and says, “What are you looking for?” 
“Wait and see,” answers the sculptor. After a few days the little 
boy comes back, and now the sculptor has carved a beautiful horse 
out of the granite. The boy stares at it in amazement, then he turns 
to the sculptor and says, “How did you know it was in there?” 
How indeed! In a sense, the sculptor had seen the horse’s form 
in the block of granite, because that particular block of granite had 
the potentiality to be formed into the shape or a horse. Similarly 
Aristotle believed that everything in nature has the potentiality of 
realizing, or achieving, a specific “form.” 
Let us return to the chicken and the egg. A chicken’s egg has 
the potentiality to become a chicken. This does not mean that all 
chicken’s eggs become chickens—many of them end up on the 
breakfast table as fried eggs, omelettes, or scrambled eggs, without 
ever having realized their potentiality. But it is equally obvious that 
a chicken’s egg cannot become a  goose. That potentiality is not 
within a chicken’s egg. The “form” of a thing, then, says something 
about its limitation as well as its potentiality. 
When Aristotle talks about the “substance” and “form” of 
things, he does not only refer to living organisms. Just as it is the 
chicken’s “form” to cackle, flutter its wings, and lay eggs, it is the 
form of the stone to fall to the ground. Just as the chicken cannot 
help cackling, the stone cannot help falling to the ground. You can, 
of course, lift a stone and hurl it high into the air, but because it is 
the stone’s nature to fall to the ground, you cannot hurl it to the 
moon. (Take care when you perform this experiment, because the 
stone might take revenge and find the shortest route back to the 
earth!) 
 
The Final Cause 
 
Before we leave the subject of all living and dead things having 
a “form” that says something about their potential “action,” I must 
add that Aristotle had a remarkable view of causality in nature. 
Today when we talk about the “cause” of anything, we mean 

--- PAGE 106 ---
107 
 
 
how it came to happen. The windowpane was smashed because 
Peter hurled a stone through it; a shoe is made because the 
shoemaker sews pieces of leather together. But Aristotle held that 
there were different types of cause in nature. Altogether he named 
four different causes. It is important to understand what he meant by 
what he called the “final cause.” 
In the case of window smashing, it is quite reasonable to ask 
why Peter threw the stone. We are thus asking what his purpose was. 
There can be no doubt that purpose played a role, also, in the matter 
of the shoe being made. But Aristotle also took into account a similar 
“purpose” when considering the purely lifeless processes in nature. 
Here’s an example: 
Why does it rain, Sophie? You have probably learned at school 
that it rains because the moisture in the clouds cools and condenses 
into raindrops that are drawn to the earth by the force of gravity. 
Aristotle would have nodded in agreement. But he would have 
added that so far you have only mentioned three of the causes. The 
“material cause” is that the moisture (the clouds) was there at the 
precise moment when the air cooled. The “efficient cause” is that 
the moisture cools, and the “formal cause” is that the “form,” or 
nature of the water, is to fall to the earth. But if you stopped there, 
Aristotle would add that it rains because plants and animals need 
rainwater in order to grow. This he called the “final cause.” Aristotle 
assigns the raindrops a life-task, or “purpose.” 
We would probably turn the whole thing upside down and say 
that plants grow because they find moisture. You can see the 
difference, can’t you, Sophie? Aristotle believed that there is a 
purpose behind everything in nature. It rains so that plants can grow; 
oranges and grapes grow so that people can eat them. 
That is not the nature of scientific reasoning today. We say that 
food and water are necessary conditions of life for man and beast. 
Had we not had these conditions we would not have existed. But it 
is not the purpose of water or oranges to be food for us. 
In the question of causality then, we are tempted to say that 
Aristotle was wrong. But let us not be too hasty. Many people 
believe that God created the world as it is so that all His creatures 
could live in it. Viewed in this way, it can naturally be claimed that 

--- PAGE 107 ---
108 
 
 
there is water in the rivers because animals and humans need water 
to live. But now we are talking about God’s purpose. The raindrops 
and the waters of the river have no interest in our welfare. 
 
Logic 
 
The distinction between “form” and “substance” plays an 
important part in Aristotle’s explanation of the way we discern 
things in the world. 
When we discern things, we classify them in various groups or 
categories. I see a horse, then I see another horse, and another. The 
horses are not exactly alike, but they have something in common, 
and this common something is the horse’s “form.” Whatever might 
be distinctive, or individual, belongs to the horse’s “substance.” 
So we go around pigeonholing everything. We put cows in 
cowsheds, horses in stables, pigs in pigsties, and chickens in chicken 
coops. The same happens when Sophie Amundsen tidies up her 
room. She puts her books on the bookshelf, her schoolbooks in her 
schoolbag, and her magazines in the drawer. Then she folds her 
clothes neatly and puts them in the closet—underwear on one shelf, 
sweaters on another, and socks in a drawer on their own. 
Notice that we do the same thing in our minds. We distinguish 
between things made of stone, things made of wool, and things made 
of rubber. We distinguish between things that are alive or dead, and 
we distinguish between vegetable, animal, and human. 
Do you see, Sophie? Aristotle wanted to do a thorough clearing 
up in nature’s “room.” He tried to show that everything in nature 
belongs to different categories and subcategories. (Hermes is a live 
creature, more specifically an animal, more specifically a vertebrate, 
more specifically a mammal, more specifically a dog, more 
specifically a Labrador, more specifically a male Labrador.) 
Go into your room, Sophie. Pick up something, anything, from 
the floor. Whatever you take, you will find that what you are holding 
belongs to a higher category The day you see something you are 
unable to classify you will get a shock. If, for example, you discover 
a small whatsit, and you can’t really say whether it is animal, 
vegetable, or mineral—I don’t think you would dare touch it. 

--- PAGE 108 ---
109 
 
 
Saying animal, vegetable, and mineral reminds me of that party 
game where the victim is sent outside the room, and when he comes 
in again he has to guess what everyone else is thinking of. Everyone 
has agreed to think of Fluffy, the cat, which at the moment is in the 
neighbor’s garden. The victim comes in and begins to guess. The 
others must only answer “yes” or “no.” If the victim is a good 
Aristotelian—and therefore no victim—the game could go pretty 
much as follows: 
Is it concrete? (Yes!) Mineral? (No!) Is it alive? (Yes!) 
Vegetable? (No!) Animal? (Yes!) Is it a bird? (No!) Is it a mammal? 
(Yes!) Is it the whole animal? (Yes!) Is it a cat? (Yes!) Is it Fluffy? 
(Yeah! Laughter. . .) 
So Aristotle invented that game. We ought to give Plato the 
credit for having invented hide-and-seek. Democritus has already 
been credited with having invented Lego. 
Aristotle was a meticulous organizer who set out to clarify our 
concepts. In fact, he founded the science of Logic. He demonstrated 
a number of laws governing conclusions or proofs that were valid. 
One example will suffice. If I first establish that “all living creatures 
are mortal” (first premise), and then establish that “Hermes is a 
living creature” (second premise), I can then elegantly conclude that 
“Hermes is mortal.” 
The example demonstrates that Aristotle’s logic was based on 
the correlation of terms, in this case “living creature” and “mortal.” 
Even though one has to admit that the above conclusion is 100% 
valid, we may also add that it hardly tells us anything new. We 
already knew that Hermes was “mortal.” (He is a “dog” and all dogs 
are “living creatures”—which are “mortal,” unlike the rock of 
Mount Everest.) Certainly we knew that, Sophie. But the 
relationship between classes of things is not always so obvious. 
From time to time it can be necessary to clarify our concepts. 
For example: Is it really possible that tiny little baby mice 
suckle just like lambs and piglets? Mice certainly do not lay eggs. 
(When did I last see a mouse’s egg?) So they give birth to live 
young—just like pigs and sheep. But we call animals that bear live 
young mammals— and mammals are animals that feed on their 
mother’s milk. So—we got there. We had the answer inside us but 

--- PAGE 109 ---
110 
 
 
we had to think it through. We forgot for the moment that mice 
really do suckle from their mother. Perhaps it was because we have 
never seen a baby mouse being suckled, for the simple reason that 
mice are rather shy of humans when they suckle their young. 
 
Nature’s Scale 
 
When Aristotle “clears up” in life, he first of all points out that 
everything in the natural world can be divided into two main 
categories. On the one hand there are nonliving things, such as 
stones, drops of water, or clumps of soil. These things have no 
potentiality for change. According to Aristotle, nonliving things can 
only change through external influence. Only living things have the 
potentiality for change. 
Aristotle divides “living things” into two different categories. 
One comprises plants, and the other creatures. Finally, these 
“creatures” can also be divided into two subcategories, namely 
animals and humans. 
You have to admit that Aristotle’s categories are clear and 
simple. There is a decisive difference between a living and a 
nonliving thing, for example a rose and a stone, just as there is a 
decisive difference between a plant and an animal, for example a 
rose and a horse. I would also claim that there definitely is a 
difference between a horse and a man. But what exactly does this 
difference consist of? Can you tell me that? 
Unfortunately I do not have time to wait while you write the 
answer down and put it in a pink envelope with a lump of sugar, so 
I’ll answer myself. When Aristotle divides natural phenomena into 
various categories, his criterion is the object’s characteristics, or 
more specifically what it can do or what it does. 
All living things (plants, animals, humans) have the ability to 
absorb nourishment, to grow, and to propagate. All “living 
creatures” (animals and humans) have in addition the ability to 
perceive the world around them and to move about. Moreover, all 
humans have the ability to think—or otherwise to order their 
perceptions into various categories and classes. 
 
So there are in reality no sharp boundaries in the natural 

--- PAGE 110 ---
111 
 
 
world. We observe a gradual transition from simple growths to more 
complicated plants, from simple animals to more complicated 
animals. At the top of this “scale” is man—who according to 
Aristotle lives the whole life of nature. Man grows and absorbs 
nourishment like plants, he has feelings and the ability to move like 
animals, but he also has a specific characteristic peculiar to humans, 
and that is the ability to think rationally. 
Therefore, man has a spark of divine reason, Sophie. Yes, I did 
say divine. From time to time Aristotle reminds us that there must 
be a God who started all movement in the natural world. Therefore 
God must be at the very top of nature’s scale. 
Aristotle imagined the movement of the stars and the planets 
guiding all movement on Earth. But there had to e something 
causing the heavenly bodies to move. Aristotle called this the “first 
mover,” or “God.” The “first mover” is itself at rest, but it is the 
“formal cause” of the movement of the heavenly bodies, and thus of 
all movement in nature. 
 
Ethics 
 
Let us go back to man, Sophie. According to Aristotle, man’s “form” 
comprises a soul, which has a plant-like part, an animal part, and a 
rational part. And now he asks: How should we live? What does it 
require to live a good life? His answer: Man can only achieve 
happiness by using all his abilities and capabilities. 
Aristotle held that there are three forms of happiness. The first 
form of happiness is a life of pleasure and enjoyment. The second 
form of happiness is a life as a free and responsible citizen. The third 
form of happiness is a life as thinker and philosopher. 
Aristotle then emphasized that all three criteria must be present 
at the same time for man to find happiness and fulfillment. He 
rejected all forms of imbalance. Had he lived today he might have 
said that a person who only develops his body lives a life that is just 
as unbalanced as someone who only uses his head. Both extremes 
are an expression of a warped way of life. 
The same applies in human relationships, where Aristotle 
advocated the “Golden Mean.” We must be neither cowardly nor 

--- PAGE 111 ---
112 
 
 
rash, but courageous (too little courage is cowardice, too much is 
rashness), neither miserly nor extravagant but liberal (not liberal 
enough is miserly, too liberal is extravagant). The same goes for 
eating. It is dangerous to eat too little, but also dangerous to eat too 
much. The ethics of both Plato and Aristotle contain echoes of Greek 
medicine: only by exercising balance and temperance will I achieve 
a happy or “harmonious” life. 
 
Politics 
 
The undesirability of cultivating extremes is also expressed in 
Aristotle’s view of society. He says that man is by nature a “political 
animal.” Without a society around us, we are not real people, he 
claimed. He pointed out that the family and the village satisfy our 
primary needs of food, warmth, marriage, and child rearing. But the 
highest form of human fellowship is only to be found in the state. 
This leads to the question of how the state should be organized. 
(You remember Plato’s “philosophic state”?) Aristotle describes 
three good forms of constitution. 
One is monarchy, or kingship—which means there is only one 
head of state. For this type of constitution to be good, it must not 
degenerate into “tyranny”—that is, when one ruler governs the state 
to his own advantage. Another good form of constitution is 
aristocracy, in which there is a larger or smaller group of rulers. This 
constitutional form must beware of degenerating into an 
“oligarchy”—when the government is run by a few people. An 
example of that would be a junta. The third good constitutional form 
is what Aristotle called polity, which means democracy. But this 
form also has its negative aspect. A democracy can quickly develop 
into mob rule. (Even if the tyrannic Hitler had not become head of 
state in Germany, all the lesser Nazis could have formed a terrifying 
mob rule.) 
 
Views on Women 
 
Finally, let us look at Aristotle’s views on women. His was 
unfortunately not as uplifting as Plato’s. Aristotle was more inclined 

--- PAGE 112 ---
113 
 
 
to believe that women were incomplete in some way. A woman was 
an “unfinished man.” In reproduction, woman is passive and 
receptive whilst man is active and productive; for the child inherits 
only the male characteristics, claimed Aristotle. 
He believed that all the child’s characteristics lay complete in 
the male sperm. The woman was the soil, receiving and bringing 
forth the seed, whilst the man was the “sower.” Or, in Aristotelian 
language, the man provides the “form” and the woman contributes 
the “substance.” 
It is of course both astonishing and highly regrettable that an 
otherwise so intelligent man could be so wrong about the 
relationship of the sexes. But it demonstrates two things: first, that 
Aristotle could not have had much practical experience regarding 
the lives of women and chil- dren, and second, it shows how wrong 
things can go when men are allowed to reign supreme in the fields 
of philosophy and science. 
Aristotle’s erroneous view of the sexes was doubly harmful 
because it was his—rather than Plato’s—view that held sway 
throughout the Middle Ages. The church thus inherited a view of 
women that is entirely without foundation in the Bible. Jesus was 
certainly no woman hater! 
I’ll say no more. But you will be hearing from me again. 
When Sophie had read the chapter on Aristotle one and a half 
times, she returned it to the brown envelope and remained sitting, 
staring into space. She suddenly became aware of the mess 
surrounding her. Books and ring binders lay scattered on the floor. 
Socks and sweaters, tights and jeans hung half out of the closet. On 
the chair in front of the writing desk was a huge pile of dirty laundry. 
Sophie had an irresistible desire to clear up. The first thing she 
did was to pull all the clothes out of the closet and onto the floor. It 
was necessary to start all over. Then she began folding her things 
very neatly and stacking them all tidily on the shelves. The closet 
had seven shelves. One was for underwear, one for socks and tights, 
and one for jeans. She gradually filled up each shelf. She never had 
any question about where to put anything. Dirty laundry went into a 
plastic bag she found on the bottom shelf. One thing she did have 
trouble with—a white knee-length stocking. The problem was that 

--- PAGE 113 ---
114 
 
 
the other one of the pair was missing. What’s more, it had never 
been Sophie’s. 
She examined it carefully. There was nothing to identify the 
owner, but Sophie had a strong suspicion about who the owner was. 
She threw it up onto the top shelf to join the Lego, the video cassette, 
and the red silk scarf. 
Sophie turned her attention to the floor. She sorted books, ring 
binders, magazines, and posters— exactly as the philosophy teacher 
had described in the chapter on Aristotle. When she had done that, 
she made her bed and got started on her writing desk. 
The last thing she did was to gather all the pages on Aristotle 
into a neat pile. She fished out an empty ring binder and a hole 
punch, made holes in the pages, and clipped them into the ring 
binder. This also went onto the top shelf. Later on in the day she 
would have to bring in the cookie tin from the den. 
From now on things would be kept neat. And she didn’t only 
mean in her room. After reading Aristotle, she realized it was just as 
important to keep her ideas orderly. She had reserved the top shelf 
of the closet especially for that kind of thing. It was the only place 
in the room that she did not yet have complete control over. 
There had been no sign of life from her mother for over two 
hours. Sophie went downstairs. 
Before she woke her mother up she decided to feed her pets. 
She bent over the goldfish bowl in the kitchen. One of the fishes 
was black, one orange, and one red and white. This was why she 
called them Black Jack, Gold-top, and Red Ridinghood. 
As she sprinkled fish food into the water she said: 
“You belong to Nature’s living creatures, you can absorb 
nourishment, you can grow and reproduce yourselves. More 
specifically, you belong to the animal kingdom. So you can move 
around and look out at the world. To be precise, you are fish, and 
you breathe through your gills and can swim back and forth in the 
waters of life.” 
Sophie put the lid back on the fish food jar. She was quite 
satisfied with the way she had placed the goldfish in Nature’s scale, 
and she was especially pleased with the expression “the waters of 
life.” So now it was the budgerigars’ turn. 

--- PAGE 114 ---
115 
 
 
Sophie poured a little birdseed in their feeding cup and said: 
“Dear Smit and Smule. You have become dear little 
budgerigars because you grew out of dear little budgerigar eggs, and 
because these eggs had the form of being budgerigars, luckily you 
didn’t grow into squawking parrots.” 
Sophie then went into the large bathroom, where the sluggish 
tortoise lay in a big box. Every now and then when her mother 
showered, she yelled that she would kill it one day. But so far it had 
been an empty threat. Sophie took a lettuce leaf from a large jam jar 
and laid it in the box. 
“Dear Govinda,” she said. “You are not one of the speediest 
animals, but you certainly are able to sense a tiny fraction of the 
great big world we live in. You’ll have to content yourself with the 
fact that you are not the only one who can’t exceed your own limits.” 
Sherekan was probably out catching mice—that was a cat’s 
nature, after all. Sophie crossed the living room toward her mother’s 
bedroom. A vase of daffodils stood on the coffee table. It was as if 
the yellow blooms bowed respectfully as Sophie went by. She 
stopped for a moment and let her fingers gently brush their smooth 
heads. “You belong to the living part of nature too,” she said. 
“Actually, you are quite privileged compared to the vase you are in. 
But unfortunately you are not able to appreciate it.” 
Then Sophie tiptoed into her mother’s bedroom. Although her 
mother was in a deep sleep, Sophie laid a hand on her forehead. 
“You are one of the luckiest ones,” she said, “because you are 
not only alive like the lilies of the field. And you are not only a living 
creature like Sherekan or Govinda. You are a human, and therefore 
have the rare capacity of thought.” 
“What on earth are you talking about, Sophie?” Her mother had 
woken up more quickly than usual. 
“I was just saying that you look like a lazy tortoise. I can 
otherwise inform you that I have tidied up my room, with 
philosophic thoroughness.” 
Her mother lifted her head. 
“I’ll be right there,” she said. “Will you put the coffee on?” 
Sophie did as she was asked, and they were soon sitting in the 
kitchen over coffee, juice, and chocolate. 

--- PAGE 115 ---
116 
 
 
Suddenly Sophie said, “Have you ever wondered why we are 
alive, Mom?” “Oh, not again!” 
“Yes, because now I know the answer. People live on this 
planet so that someone can go around giving names to everything.” 
“Is that right? I never thought of that.” 
“Then you have a big problem, because a human is a thinking 
animal. If you don’t think, you’re not really a human.” 
“Sophie!” 
“Imagine if there were only vegetables and animals. Then there 
wouldn’t have been anybody to tell the difference between ‘cat’ and 
‘dog,’ or ‘lily’ and ‘gooseberry.’ Vegetables and animals are living 
too, but we are the only creatures that can categorize nature into 
different groups and classes.” 
“You really are the most peculiar girl I have ever had,” said her 
mother. 
“I should hope so,” said Sophie. “Everybody is more or less 
peculiar. I am a person, so I am more or less peculiar. You have only 
one girl, so I am the most peculiar.” 
“What I meant was that you scare the living daylights out of me 
with all that new talk.” “You are easily scared, then.” 
Later that afternoon Sophie went back to the den. She managed 
to smuggle the big cookie tin up to her room without her mother 
noticing. 
First she put all the pages in the right order. Then she punched 
holes in them and put them in the ring binder, before the chapter on 
Aristotle. Finally she numbered each page in the top right-hand 
corner. There were in all over fifty pages. Sophie was in the process 
of compiling her own book on philosophy. It was not by her, but 
written especially for her. 
She had no time to do her homework for Monday. They were 
probably going to have a test in Religious Knowledge, but the 
teacher always said he valued personal commitment and value 
judgments. Sophie felt she was beginning to have a certain basis for 
both. 
 
 

--- PAGE 116 ---
117 
 
 
 
 
Hellenism 
 
... a spark from the fire… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although the philosophy teacher had begun sending his letters 
directly to the old hedge, Sophie nevertheless looked in the mailbox 
on Monday morning, more out of habit than anything else. 
It was empty, not surprisingly. She began to walk down Clover 
Close. 
Suddenly she noticed a photograph lying on the sidewalk. It 
was a picture of a white jeep and a blue flag with the letters UN on 
it. Wasn’t that the United Nations flag? 
Sophie turned the picture over and saw that it was a regular 
postcard. To “Hilde Moller Knag, c/o Sophie Amundsen ...” It had 
a Norwegian stamp and was postmarked “UN Battalion” Friday 
June 15, 1990. 
June 15! That was Sofie’s birthday! 
The card read: 
 
Dear Hilde, 
I assume you are still celebrating your 15th birthday. Or is this 
the morning after? 
Anyway, it makes no difference to your present. In a sense, that 
will last a lifetime. But I’d like to wish you a happy birthday one 
more time. Perhaps you understand now why I send the cards to 
Sophie. I am sure she will pass them on to you. 

--- PAGE 117 ---
118 
 
 
P.S. Mom said you had lost your wallet. I hereby promise to 
reimburse you the 150 crowns. You will probably be able to get 
another school I.D. before they close for the summer vacation. 
Love from Dad. 
 
 
Sophie stood glued to the spot. When was the previous card 
postmarked? She seemed to recall that the postcard of the beach was 
also postmarked June—even though it was a whole month off. She 
simply hadn’t looked properly. 
She glanced at her watch and then ran back to the house. She 
would just have to be late for school today! 
Sophie let herself in and leaped upstairs to her room. She found 
the first postcard to Hilde under the red silk scarf. Yes! It was also 
postmarked June 15! Sophie’s birthday and the day before the 
summer vacation. 
Her mind was racing as she ran over to the supermarket to meet 
Joanna. 
Who was Hilde? How could her father as good as take it for 
granted that Sophie would find her? 
In any case, it was senseless of him to send Sophie the cards 
instead of sending them directly to his daughter. It could not 
possibly be because he didn’t know his own daughter’s address. 
Was it a practical joke? Was he trying to surprise his daughter on 
her birthday by getting a perfect stranger to play detective and 
mailman? Was that why she was being given a month’s headstart? 
And was using her as the go-between a way of giving his daughter 
a new girlfriend as a birthday present? Could she be the present that 
would “last a lifetime”? 
If this joker really was in Lebanon, how had he gotten hold of 
Sophie’s address? Also, Sophie and Hilde had at least two things in 
common. If Hilde’s birthday was June 15, they were both born on 
the same day. And they both had fathers who were on the other side 
of the globe. 
Sophie felt she was being drawn into an unnatural world. 
Maybe it was not so dumb after all to believe in fate. Still—she 
shouldn’t be jumping to conclusions; it could all have a perfectly 

--- PAGE 118 ---
119 
 
 
natural explanation. But how had Alberto Knox found Hilde’s wallet 
when Hilde lived in Lillesand? Lillesand was hundreds of miles 
away. And why had Sophie found this postcard on her sidewalk? 
Did it fall out of the mailman’s bag just as he got to Sophie’s 
mailbox? If so, why should he drop this particular card? 
“Are you completely insane?” Joanna burst out when Sophie 
finally made it to the supermarket. 
“Sorry!” 
Joanna frowned at her severely, like a schoolteacher. 
“You’d better have a good explanation.” 
“It has to do with the UN,” said Sophie. “I was detained by 
hostile troops in Lebanon.” 
“Sure ... You’re just in love!” 
They ran to school as fast as their legs could carry them. 
The Religious Knowledge test that Sophie had not had time to 
prepare for was given out in the third period. The sheet read: 
 
 
Philosophy of Life and Tolerance 
 
1.   Make a list of things we can know. Then make a list of 
things we can only believe. 
2.   Indicate some of the factors contributing to a person’s 
philosophy of life. 
3.    What is meant by conscience? Do you think conscience 
is the same for everyone? 
4.    What is meant by priority of values? 
 
 
Sophie sat thinking for a long time before she started to write. 
Could she use any of the ideas she had learned from Alberto Knox? 
She was going to have to, because she had not opened her Religious 
Knowledge book for days. Once she began to write, the words 
simply flowed from her pen. 
She wrote that we know the moon is not made of green cheese 
and that there are also craters on the dark side of the moon, that both 
Socrates and Jesus were sentenced to death, that everybody has to 

--- PAGE 119 ---
120 
 
 
die sooner or later, that the great temples on the Acropolis were built 
after the Persian wars in the fifth century B.C. and that the most 
important oracle in ancient Greece was the oracle at Delphi. As 
examples of what we can only believe, Sophie mentioned the 
questions of whether or not there is life on other planets, whether 
God exists or not, whether there is life after death, and whether Jesus 
was the son of God or merely a wise man. “We can certainly not 
know where the world came from,” she wrote, com- pleting her list. 
“The universe can be compared to a large rabbit pulled out of a top 
hat. Philosophers try to climb up one of the fine hairs of the rabbit’s 
fur and stare straight into the eyes of the Great Magician. Whether 
they will ever succeed is an open question. But if each philosopher 
climbed onto another one’s back, they would get even higher up in 
the rabbit’s fur, and then, in my opinion, there would be some 
chance they would make it some day. P.S. In the Bible there is 
something that could have been one of the fine hairs of the rabbit’s 
fur. The hair was called the Tower of Babel, and it was destroyed 
because the Magician didn’t want the tiny human insects to crawl 
up that high out of the white rabbit he had just created.” 
Then there was the next question: “Indicate some of the factors 
contributing to a person’s philosophy of life.” Upbringing and 
environment were important here. People living at the time of Plato 
had a different philosophy of life than many people have today 
because they lived in a different age and a different environment. 
Another factor was the kind of experience people chose to get 
themselves. 
Common sense was not determined by environment. 
Everybody had that. Maybe one could compare environment and 
social situation with the conditions that existed deep down in Plato’s 
cave. By using their intelligence individuals can start to drag 
themselves up from the darkness. But a journey like that requires 
personal courage. Socrates is a good example of a person who 
managed to free himself from the prevailing views of his time by his 
own intelligence. Finally, she wrote: “Nowadays, people of many 
lands and cultures are being intermingled more and more. 
Christians, Muslims, and Buddhists may live in the same apartment 
building. In which case it is more important to accept each other’s 

--- PAGE 120 ---
121 
 
 
beliefs than to ask why everyone does not believe the same thing.” 
Not bad, thought Sophie. She certainly felt she had covered 
some ground with what she had learned from her philosophy 
teacher. And she could always supplement it with a dash of her own 
common sense and what she might have read and heard elsewhere. 
She applied herself to the third question: “What is meant by 
conscience? Do you think conscience is the same for everyone?” 
This was something they had discussed a lot in class. Sophie wrote: 
Conscience is people’s ability to respond to right and wrong. My 
personal opinion is that everyone is endowed with this ability, so in 
other words, conscience is innate. Socrates would have said the 
same. 
But just what conscience dictates can vary a lot from one 
person to the next. One could say that the Sophists had a point here. 
They thought that right and wrong is something mainly determined 
by the environment the individual grows up in. Socrates, on the 
other hand, believed that conscience is the same for everyone. 
Perhaps both views were right. Even if everybody doesn’t feel guilty 
about showing themselves naked, most people will have a bad 
conscience if they are really mean to someone. Still, it must be 
remembered that having a conscience is not the same as using it. 
Sometimes it looks as if people act quite unscrupulously, but I 
believe they also have a kind of conscience somewhere, deep down. 
Just as it seems as if some people have no sense at all, but that’s only 
because they are not using it. P.S. Common sense and conscience 
can both be compared to a muscle. If you don’t use a muscle, it gets 
weaker and weaker.” 
Now there was only one question left: “What is meant by 
priority of values?” This was another thing they had discussed a lot 
lately. For example, it could be of value to drive a car and get 
quickly from one place to another. But if driving led to deforestation 
and polluting the natural environment, you were facing a choice of 
values. After careful consideration Sophie felt she had come to the 
conclusion that healthy forests and a pure environment were more 
valuable than getting to work quickly. She gave several more 
examples. Finally she wrote: “Personally, I think Philosophy is a 
more important subject than English Grammar. It would therefore 

