--- PAGE 121 ---
122 
 
 
be a sensible priority of values to have Philosophy on the timetable 
and cut down a bit on English lessons.” 
In the last break the teacher drew Sophie aside. 
“I have already read your Religion test,” he said. “It was near 
the top of the pile.” “I hope it gave you some food for thought.” 
“That was exactly what I wanted to talk to you about. It was in 
many ways very mature. 
Surprisingly so. And self-reliant. But had you done your 
homework, Sophie?” Sophie fidgeted a little. 
“Well, you did say it was important to have a personal point of 
view.” “Well, yes I did ... but there are limits.” 
Sophie looked him straight in the eye. She felt she could permit 
herself this after all she had experienced lately. 
“I have started studying philosophy,” she said. “It gives one a 
good background for personal opinions.” 
“But it doesn’t make it easy for me to grade your paper. It will 
either be a D or an A.” “Because I was either quite right or quite 
wrong? Is that what you’re saying?” 
“So let’s say A,” said the teacher. “But next time, do your 
homework!” 
When Sophie got home from school that afternoon, she flung 
her schoolbag on the steps and ran down to the den. A brown 
envelope lay on top of the gnarled roots. It was quite dry around the 
edges, so it must have been a long time since Hermes had dropped 
it. 
She took the envelope with her and let herself in the front door. 
She fed the animals and then went upstairs to her room. Lying on 
her bed, she opened Alberto’s letter and read: 
 
HELLENISM 
 
Here we are again, Sophie! Having read about the natural 
philosophers and Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, you are now 
familiar with the foundations of European philosophy. So from 
now on we will drop the introductory questions which you 
earlier received in white envelopes. I imagine you probably 

--- PAGE 122 ---
123 
 
 
have plenty of other assignments and tests at school. I shall now 
tell you about the long period from Aristotle near the end of the 
fourth century 
B.C. right up to the early Middle Ages around A.D. 400. Notice 
that we can now write both B.C. and A.D. because Christianity was 
in fact one of the most important, and the most mysterious, factors 
of the period. 
Aristotle died in the year 322 B.C., at the time when Athens 
had lost its dominant role. 
This was not least due to the political upheavals resulting from 
the conquests of Alexander the Great (356-323 B.C.). 
Alexander the Great was the King of Macedonia. Aristotle was 
also from Macedonia, and for a time he was even the young 
Alexander’s tutor. It was Alexander who won the final, decisive 
victory over the Persians. And moreover, Sophie, with his many 
conquests he linked both Egypt and the Orient as far east as India to 
the Greek civilization. 
This marked the beginning of a new epoch in the history of mankind. 
A civilization sprang up in which Greek culture and the Greek 
language played a leading role. This period, which lasted for about 
300 years, is known as Hellenism. The term Hellenism refers to both 
the period of time and the Greek-dominated culture that prevailed in 
the three Hellenistic kingdoms of Macedonia, Syria, and Egypt. 
However, from about the year 50 B.C., Rome secured the upper 
hand in military and political affairs. The new superpower gradually 
conquered all the Hellenistic kingdoms, and from then on Roman 
culture and the Latin language were predominant from Spain in the 
west to far into Asia. This was the beginning of the Roman period, 
which we often refer to as Late Antiquity. But remember one 
thing—before the Romans managed to conquer the Hellenistic 
world, Rome itself was a province of Greek culture. So Greek 
culture and Greek philosophy came to play an important role long 
after the political influence of the Greeks was a thing of the past. 
 
Religion, Philosophy and Science 
 
Hellenism was characterized by the fact that the borders between the 

--- PAGE 123 ---
124 
 
 
various countries and cultures became erased. Previously the 
Greeks, the Romans, the Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Syrians, 
and the Persians had worshipped their own gods within what we 
generally call a “national religion.” Now the different cultures 
merged into one great witch’s caldron of religious, philosophical, -
and scientific ideas. 
We could perhaps say that the town square was replaced by the 
world arena. The old town square had also buzzed with voices, 
bringing now different wares to market, now different thoughts and 
ideas. The new aspect was that town squares were being filled with 
wares and ideas from all over the world. The voices were buzzing in 
many different languages. 
We have already mentioned that the Greek view of life was 
now much more widespread than it had been in the former Greek 
cultural areas. But as time went on, Oriental gods were also 
worshipped in all the Mediterranean countries. New religious 
formations arose that could draw on the gods and the beliefs of many 
of the old nations. This is called syncretism or the fusion of creeds. 
Prior to this, people had felt a strong affinity with their own 
folk and their own city-state. But as the borders and boundaries 
became erased, many people began to experience doubt and 
uncertainty about their philosophy of life. Late Antiquity was 
generally characterized by religious doubts, cultural dissolution, and 
pessimism. It was said that “the world has grown old.” 
A common feature of the new religious formations during the 
Hellenistic period was that they frequently contained teachings 
about how mankind could attain salvation from death. 
These teachings were often secret. By accepting the teachings 
and performing certain rituals, a believer could hope for the 
immortality of the soul and eternal life. A certain insight into the 
true nature of the universe could be just as important for the 
salvation of the soul as religious rituals. 
So much for the new religions, Sophie. But philosophy was 
also moving increasingly in the direction of “salvation” and serenity. 
Philosophic insight, it was now thought, did not only have its own 
reward; it should also free mankind from pessimism and the fear of 
death. Thus the boundaries between religion and philosophy were 

--- PAGE 124 ---
125 
 
 
gradually eliminated. 
In general, the philosophy of Hellenism was not startlingly 
original. No new Plato or Aristotle appeared on the scene. On the 
contrary, the three great Athenian philosophers were a source of 
inspiration to a number of philosophic trends which I shall briefly 
describe in a moment. 
Hellenistic science, too, was influenced by a blend of 
knowledge from the various cultures. The town of Alexandria 
played a key role here as a meeting place between East and West. 
While Athens remained the center of philosophy with still 
functioning schools of philosophy after Plato and Aristotle, 
Alexandria became the center for science. With its extensive library, 
it became the center for mathematics, astronomy, biology, and 
medicine. 
Hellenistic culture could well be compared to the world of 
today. The twentieth century has also been influenced by an 
increasingly open civilization. In our own time, too, this opening out 
has resulted in tremendous upheavals for religion and philosophy. 
And just as in Rome around the beginning of the Christian era one 
could come across Greek, Egyptian, and Oriental religions, today, 
as we approach the end of the twentieth century, we can find in all 
European cities of any size religions from all parts of the world. 
We also see nowadays how a conglomeration of old and new 
religions, philosophies, and sciences can form the basis of new 
offers on the “view-of-life” market. Much of this “new knowledge” 
is actually the flotsam of old thought, some of whose roots go back 
to Hellenism. 
As I have said, Hellenistic philosophy continued to work with 
the problems raised by Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Common to 
them all was their desire to discover how mankind should best live 
and die. They were concerned with ethics. In the new civilization, 
this became the central philosophical project. The main emphasis 
was on finding out what true happiness was and how it could be 
achieved. We are going to look at four of these philosophical trends. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 125 ---
126 
 
 
The Cynics 
 
The story goes that one day Socrates stood gazing at a stall that 
sold all kinds of wares. 
Finally he said, “What a lot of things I don’t need!” 
This statement could be the motto for the Cynic school of 
philosophy, founded by Antisthenes in Athens around 400 B.C. 
Antisthenes had been a pupil of Socrates, and had become 
particularly interested in his frugality. 
The Cynics emphasized that true happiness is not found in 
external advantages such as material luxury, political power, or 
good health. True happiness lies in not being dependent on such 
random and fleeting things. And because happiness does not consist 
in benefits of this kind, it is within everyone’s reach. Moreover, 
having once been attained, it can never be lost. 
The best known of the Cynics was Diogenes, a pupil of 
Antisthenes, who reputedly lived in a barrel and owned nothing but 
a cloak, a stick, and a bread bag. (So it wasn’t easy to steal his 
happiness from him!) One day while he was sitting beside his barrel 
enjoying the sun, he was visited by Alexander the Great. The 
emperor stood before him and asked if there was anything he could 
do for him. Was there anything he desired? “Yes,” Diogenes replied. 
“Stand to one side. You’re blocking the sun.” Thus Diogenes 
showed that he was no less happy and rich than the great man before 
him. He had everything he desired. 
The Cynics believed that people did not need to be concerned 
about their own health. 
Even suffering and death should not disturb them. Nor should 
they let themselves be tormented by concern for other people’s 
woes. Nowadays the terms “cynical” and “cynicism” have come to 
mean a sneering disbelief in human sincerity, and they imply 
insensitivity to other people’s suffering. 
 
The Stoics 
The Cynics were instrumental in the development of the Stoic 
school of philosophy, which grew up in Athens around 300 B.C. Its 
founder was Zeno, who came originally from Cyprus and joined the 

--- PAGE 126 ---
127 
 
 
Cynics in Athens after being shipwrecked. He used to gather his 
followers under a portico. The name “Stoic” comes from the Greek 
word for portico (stoo). Stoicism was later to have great significance 
for Roman culture. 
Like Heraclitus, the Stoics believed that everyone was a part of 
the same common sense—or “logos.” They thought that each person 
was like a world in miniature, or “microcosmos,” which is a 
reflection of the “macro-cosmos.” 
This led to the thought that there exists a universal right-ness, 
the so-called natural law. And because this natural law was based on 
timeless human and universal reason, it did not alter with time and 
place. In this, then, the Stoics sided with Socrates against the 
Sophists. 
Natural law governed all mankind, even slaves. The Stoics 
considered the legal statutes of the various states merely as 
incomplete imitations of the “law” embedded in nature itself. 
In the same way that the Stoics erased the difference between 
the individual and the universe, they also denied any conflict 
between “spirit” and “matter.” There is only one nature, they 
averred. This kind of idea is called monism (in contrast to Plato’s 
clear dualism or two-fold reality). 
As true children of their time, the Stoics were distinctly 
“cosmopolitan,” in that they were more receptive to contemporary 
culture than the “barrel philosophers” (the Cynics). They drew 
attention to human fellowship, they were preoccupied with politics, 
and many of them, notably the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius 
(A.D. 121-180), were active statesmen. They encouraged Greek 
culture and philosophy in Rome, one of the most distinguished of 
them being the orator, philosopher, and statesman Cicero (106-43 
B.C.). It was he who formed the very concept of “humanism”—that 
is, a view of life that has the individual as its central focus. Some 
years later, the Stoic Seneca (4 B.C.-A.D. 65) said that “to mankind, 
mankind is holy.” This has remained a slogan for humanism ever 
since. 
The Stoics, moreover, emphasized that all natural processes, 
such as sickness and death, follow the unbreakable laws of nature. 
Man must therefore learn to accept his destiny. Nothing happens 

--- PAGE 127 ---
128 
 
 
accidentally. Everything happens through necessity, so it is of little 
use to complain when fate comes knocking at the door. One must 
also accept the happy events of life unperturbed, they thought. In 
this we see their kinship with the Cynics, who claimed that all 
external events were unimportant. Even today we use the term “stoic 
calm” about someone who does not let his feelings take over. 
 
The Epicureans 
As we have seen, Socrates was concerned with finding out how 
man could live a good life. Both the Cynics and the Stoics 
interpreted his philosophy as meaning that man had to free himself 
from material luxuries. But Socrates also had a pupil named 
Aristippus. He believed that the aim of life was to attain the highest 
possible sensory enjoyment. “The highest good is pleasure,” he said, 
“the greatest evil is pain.” So he wished to develop a way of life 
whose aim was to avoid pain in all forms. (The Cynics and the Stoics 
believed in enduring pain of all kinds, which is not the same as 
setting out to avoid pain.) 
Around the year 300 B.C., Epicurus (341-270) founded a 
school of philosophy in Athens. 
His followers were called Epicureans. He developed the 
pleasure ethic of Aristippus and combined it with the atom theory of 
Democritus. 
The story goes that the Epicureans lived in a garden. They were 
therefore known as the “garden philosophers.” Above the entrance 
to this garden there is said to have hung a notice saying, “Stranger, 
here you will live well. Here pleasure is the highest good.” 
Epicurus emphasized that the pleasurable results of an action 
must always be weighed against its possible side effects. If you have 
ever binged on chocolate you know what I mean. If you haven’t, try 
this exercise: Take all your saved-up pocket money and buy two 
hundred crowns’ worth of chocolate. (We’ll assume you like 
chocolate.) It is essential to this exercise that you eat it all at one 
time. About half an hour later, when all that delicious chocolate is 
eaten, you will understand what Epicurus meant by side effects. 
Epicurus also believed that a pleasurable result in the short term 
must be weighed against the possibility of a greater, more lasting, or 

--- PAGE 128 ---
129 
 
 
more intense pleasure in the long term. (Maybe you abstain from 
eating chocolate for a whole year because you prefer to save up all 
your pocket money and buy a new bike or go on an expensive 
vacation abroad.) Unlike animals, we are able to plan our lives. We 
have the ability to make a “pleasure calculation.” Chocolate is good, 
but a new bike or a trip to England is better. 
Epicurus emphasized, though, that “pleasure” does not 
necessarily mean sensual pleasure—like eating chocolate, for 
instance. Values such as friendship and the appreciation of art also 
count. Moreover, the enjoyment of life required the old Greek ideals 
of self-control, temperance, and serenity. Desire must be curbed, 
and serenity will help us to endure pain. 
Fear of the gods brought many people to the garden of 
Epicurus. In this connection, the atom theory of Democritus was a 
useful cure for religious superstitions. In order to live a good life it 
is not unimportant to overcome the fear of death. To this end 
Epicurus made use of Democritus’s theory of the “soul atoms.” You 
may perhaps remember that Democritus believed there was no life 
after death because when we die, the “soul atoms” disperse in all 
directions. 
“Death does not concern us,” Epicurus said quite simply, 
“because as long as we exist, death is not here. And when it does 
come, we no longer exist.” (When you think about it, no one has 
ever been bothered by being dead.) 
Epicurus summed up his liberating philosophy with what he 
called the four medicinal herbs: 
The gods are not to be feared. Death is nothing to worry about. 
Good is easy to attain. 
The fearful is easy to endure. 
From a Greek point of view, there was nothing new in 
comparing philosophical projects with those of medical science. The 
intention was simply that man should equip himself with a 
“philosophic medicine chest” containing the four ingredients I 
mentioned. 
In contrast to the Stoics, the Epicureans showed little or no 
interest in politics and the community. “Live in seclusion!” was the 
advice of Epicurus. We could perhaps compare his “garden” with 

--- PAGE 129 ---
130 
 
 
our present-day communes. There are many people in our own time 
who have sought a “safe harbor”—away from society. 
After Epicurus, many Epicureans developed an overemphasis 
on self-indulgence. Their motto was “Live for the moment!” The 
word “epicurean” is used in a negative sense nowadays to describe 
someone who lives only for pleasure. 
 
Neoplatonism 
As I showed you, Cynicism, Stoicism, and Epicureanism all 
had their roots in the teaching of Socrates. They also made use of 
certain of the pre-Socratics like Heraclitus and  Democritus. 
But the most remarkable philosophic trend in the late 
Hellenistic period was first and foremost inspired by Plato’s 
philosophy. We therefore call it Neoplatonism. 
The most important figure in Neoplatonism was Plotinus (c. 
205-270), who studied philosophy in Alexandria but later settled in 
Rome. It is interesting to note that he came from Alexandria, the city 
that had been the central meeting point for Greek philosophy and 
Oriental mysticism for several centuries. Plotinus brought with him 
to Rome a doctrine of salvation that was to compete seriously with 
Christianity when its time came. However, Neoplatonism also 
became a strong influence in mainstream Christian theology as well. 
Remember Plato’s doctrine of ideas, Sophie, and the way he 
distinguished between the world of ideas and the sensory world. 
This meant establishing a clear division between the soul and the 
body. Man thus became a dual creature: our body consisted of earth 
and dust like everything else in the sensory world, but we also had 
an immortal soul. This was widely believed by many Greeks long 
before Plato. Plotinus was also familiar with similar ideas from Asia. 
Plotinus believed that the world is a span between two poles. 
At one end is the divine light which he calls the One. Sometimes he 
calls it God. At the other end is absolute darkness, which receives 
none of the light from the One. But Plotinus’s point is that this 
darkness actually has no existence. It is simply the absence of 
light—in other words, it is not. All that exists is God, or the One, 
but in the same way that a beam of light grows progressively dimmer 
and is gradually extinguished, there is somewhere a point that the 

--- PAGE 130 ---
131 
 
 
divine glow cannot reach. 
According to Plotinus, the soul is illuminated by the light from 
the One, while matter is the darkness that has no real existence. But 
the forms in nature have a faint glow of the One. 
Imagine a great burning bonfire in the night from which sparks 
fly in all directions. A wide radius of light from the bonfire turns 
night into day in the immediate area; but the glow from the fire is 
visible even from a distance of several miles. If we went even further 
away, we would be able to see a tiny speck of light like a far-off 
lantern in the dark, and if we went on moving away, at some point 
the light would not reach us. Somewhere the rays of light disappear 
into the night, and when it is completely dark we see nothing. There 
are neither shapes nor shadows. 
Imagine now that reality is a bonfire like this. That which is 
burning is God—and the darkness beyond is the cold matter that 
man and animals are made of. Closest to God are the eternal ideas 
which are the primal forms of all creatures. The human soul, above 
all, is a  “spark from the fire.” Yet everywhere in nature some of the 
divine light is shining. We can see it in all living creatures; even a 
rose or a bluebell has its divine glow. Furthest away from the living 
God are earth and water and stone. 
I am saying that there is something of the divine mystery in 
everything that exists. We can see it sparkle in a sunflower or a 
poppy. We sense more of this unfathomable mystery in a butterfly 
that flutters from a twig—or in a goldfish swimming in a bowl. But 
we are closest to God in our own soul. Only there can we become 
one with the great mystery of life. In truth, at very rare moments we 
can experience that we ourselves are that divine mystery. 
Plotinus’s metaphor is rather like Plato’s myth of the cave: the 
closer we get to the mouth of the cave, the closer we get to that which 
all existence springs from. But in contrast to Plato’s clear two-fold 
reality, Plotinus’s doctrine is characterized by an experience of 
wholeness. 
Everything is one—for everything is God. Even the shadows 
deep down in Plato’s cave have a faint glow of the One. 
On rare occasions in his life, Plotinus experienced a fusion of 
his soul with God. We usually call this a mystical experience. 

--- PAGE 131 ---
132 
 
 
Plotinus is not alone in having had such experiences. People have 
told of them at all times and in all cultures. The details might be 
different, but the essential features are the same. Let us take a look 
at some of these features. 
 
Mysticism 
A mystical experience is an experience of merging with God or 
the “cosmic spirit.” Many religions emphasize the gulf between God 
and Creation, but the mystic experiences no such gulf. He or she has 
experienced being “one with God” or “merging” with Him. 
The idea is that what we usually call “I” is not the true “I.” In 
short glimpses we can experience an identification with a greater 
“I.” Some mystics call it God, others call it the cosmic spirit, Nature, 
or the Universe. When the fusion happens, the mystic feels that he 
is “losing himself”; he disappears into God or is lost in God in the 
same way that a drop of water loses itself when it merges with the 
sea. An Indian mystic once expressed it in this way: “When I was, 
God was not. When God is, I am no more.” The Christian mystic 
Angelus Silesius (1624-1677) put it another way: Every drop 
becomes the sea when it flows oceanward, just as at last the soul 
ascends and thus becomes the Lord. 
Now you might feel that it cannot be particularly pleasant to 
“lose oneself.” I know what you mean. But the point is that what 
you lose is so very much less than what you gain. You lose yourself 
only in the form you have at the moment, but at the same time you 
realize that you are something much bigger. You are the universe. 
In fact, you are the cosmic spirit itself, Sophie. It is you who are 
God. If you have to lose yourself as Sophie Amundsen, you can take 
comfort in the knowledge that this “everyday I” is something you 
will lose one day anyway. 
Your real “I”— which you can only experience if you are able 
to lose yourself—is, according to the mystics, like a mysterious fire 
that goes on burning to all eternity. 
But a mystical experience like this does not always come of 
itself. The mystic may have to seek the path of “purification and 
enlightenment” to his meeting with God. This path consists of the 
simple life and various meditation techniques. Then all at once the 

--- PAGE 132 ---
133 
 
 
mystic achieves his goal, and can exclaim, “I am God” or “I am 
You.” 
Mystical trends are found in all the great world religions. And 
the descriptions of mystical experiences given by the mystics show 
a remarkable similarity across all cultural boundaries. It is in the 
mystic’s attempt to provide a religious or philosophic interpretation 
of the mystical experience that his cultural background reveals itself. 
In Western mysticism—that is, within Judaism, Christianity, 
and Islam—the mystic emphasizes that his meeting is with a 
personal God. Although God is present both in nature and in the 
human soul, he is also far above and beyond the world. In Eastern 
mysticism—that is, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Chinese religion—it 
is more usual to emphasize that the mystic experiences a total fusion 
with God or the “cosmic spirit.” 
“I am the cosmic spirit,” the mystic can exclaim, or “I am God.” 
For God is not only present in the world; he has nowhere else to be. 
In India, especially, there have been strong mystical 
movements since long before the time of Plato. Swami 
Vivekenanda, an Indian who was instrumental in bringing Hinduism 
to the west, once said, “Just as certain world religions say that people 
who do not believe in a personal God outside themselves are 
atheists, we say that a person who does not believe in himself is an 
atheist. Not believing in the splendor of one’s own soul is what we 
call atheism.” 
A mystical experience can also have ethical significance. A 
former president of India, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, said once, 
“Love thy neighbor as thyself because you ore your neighbor. It is 
an illusion that makes you think that your neighbor is someone other 
than yourself.” 
People of our own time who do not adhere to a particular 
religion also tell of mystical experiences. They have suddenly 
experienced something they have called “cosmic consciousness” or 
an “oceanic feeling.” They have felt themselves wrenched out of 
Time and have experienced the world “from the perspective of 
eternity.” 
Sophie sat up in bed. She had to feel whether she still had a 
body. As she read more and more about Plato and the mystics, she 

--- PAGE 133 ---
134 
 
 
had begun to feel as though she were floating around in the room, 
out of the window and far off above the town. From there she had 
looked down on all the people in the square, and had floated on and 
on over the globe that was her home, over the North Sea and Europe, 
down over the Sahara and across the African savanna. 
The whole world had become almost like a living person, and 
it felt as if that person were Sophie herself. The world is me, she 
thought. The great big universe that she had often felt to be 
unfathomable and terrifying—was her own “I.” Now, too, the 
universe was enormous and majestic, but now it was herself who 
was so big. 
The extraordinary feeling was fleeting, but Sophie was sure she 
would never forget it. It felt as if something inside her had burst 
through her forehead and become merged with everything else, the 
way a drop of color can tint a whole jug of water. 
When it was all over, it was like waking up with a headache 
after a wonderful dream. Sophie registered with a touch of 
disillusionment that she had a body which was trying to sit up in 
bed. Lying on her stomach reading the pages from Alberto Knox 
had given her a backache. But she had experienced something 
unforgettable. 
Eventually she pulled herself together and stood up. The first 
thing she did was to punch holes in the pages and file them in her 
ring binder together with the other lessons. Then she .went into the 
garden. 
The birds were singing as if the world had just been born. The 
pale green of the birches behind the old rabbit hutches was so intense 
that it seemed as though the Creator had not yet finished blending 
the color. 
Could she really believe that everything was one divine “I”? 
Could she believe that she carried within her a soul that was a “spark 
from the fire”? If it was true, then she was truly a divine creature. 
 
 

--- PAGE 134 ---
135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Postcards 
 
…I’m imposing a severe censorship on myself… 
 
 
 
 
Several days went by without any word from the philosophy teacher. 
Tomorrow was Thursday, May 17— Norway’s national day. School 
would be closed on the 18th as well. As they walked home after 
school Joanna suddenly exclaimed, “Let’s go camping!” 
Sophie’s immediate reaction was that she couldn’t be away 
from the house for long. But then she said, “Sure, why not?” 
A couple of hours later Joanna arrived at Sophie’s door with a 
large backpack. Sophie had packed hers as well, and she also had 
the tent. They both had bedrolls and sweaters, groundsheets and 
flashlights, large-size thermos bottles and plenty of their favorite 
food. 
When Sophie’s mother got home around five o’clock, she gave 
them a sermon about what they must and must not do. She also 
insisted on knowing where they were going to set up camp. 
They told her they intended to make for Grouse Top. They 
might be lucky enough to hear the mating call of the grouse next 
morning. 
Sophie had an ulterior motive for choosing that particular spot. 
She thought that Grouse Top must be pretty close to the major’s 
cabin. Something was urging her to return to it, but she didn’t dare 
go alone. 
The two girls walked down the path that led from the little cul-

--- PAGE 135 ---
136 
 
 
de-sac just beyond Sophie’s garden gate. They chatted about this 
and that, and Sophie enjoyed taking a little time off from everything 
having to do with philosophy. 
By eight o’clock they had pitched their tent in a clearing by 
Grouse Top. They had prepared themselves for the night and their 
bedrolls were unfolded. When they had eaten their sandwiches, 
Sophie asked, “Have you ever heard of the major’s cabin?” 
“The major’s cabin?” 
“There’s a hut in the woods somewhere near here ... by a little 
lake. A strange man lived there once, a major, that’s why it’s called 
the major’s cabin.” 
“Does anyone live there now?” “Do you want to go and see?” 
“Where is it?” 
Sophie pointed in among the trees. 
Joanna was not particularly eager, but in the end they set out. 
The sun was low in the sky. 
They walked in between the tall pine trees at first, but soon they 
were pushing their way through bush and thicket. Eventually they 
made their way down to a path. Could it be the path Sophie had 
followed that Sunday morning? 
It must have been—almost at once she could point to 
something shining between the trees to the right of the path. 
“It’s in there,” she said. 
They were soon standing at the edge of the small lake. Sophie 
gazed at the cabin across the water. All the windows were now 
shuttered up. The red building was the most deserted place she had 
seen for ages. 
Joanna turned toward her. “Do we have to walk on the water?” 
“Of course not. We’ll row.” 
Sophie pointed down into the reeds. There lay the rowboat, just 
as before. “Have you been here before?” 
Sophie shook her head. Trying to explain her previous visit 
would be far too complicated. And then she would have to tell her 
friend about Alberto Knox and the philosophy course as well. 
They laughed and joked as they rowed across the water. When 
they reached the opposite bank, Sophie made sure they drew the boat 
well up on land. 

--- PAGE 136 ---
137 
 
 
They went to the front door. As there was obviously nobody in 
the cabin, Joanna tried the door handle. 
“Locked... you didn’t expect it to be open, did you?” “Maybe 
we can find a key,” said Sophie. 
She began to search in the crevices of the stonework 
foundation. 
“Oh, let’s go back to the tent instead,” said Joanna after a few 
minutes. But just then Sophie exclaimed, “Here it is! I found it!” 
She held up the key triumphantly. She put it in the lock and the 
door swung open. 
The two friends sneaked inside as if they were up to something 
criminal. It was cold and dark in the cabin. 
“We can’t see a thing!” said Joanna. 
But Sophie had thought of that. She took a box of matches out 
of her pocket and struck one. They only had time to see that the 
cabin was deserted before the match went out. Sophie struck 
another, and this time she noticed a stump of candle in a wrought-
iron candlestick on top of the stove. She lit it with the third match 
and the little room became light enough for them to look around. 
“Isn’t it odd that such a small candle can light up so much 
darkness?” said Sophie. Her friend nodded. 
“But somewhere the light disappears into the dark,” Sophie 
went on. “Actually, darkness has no existence of its own. It’s only a 
lack of light.” 
Joanna shivered. “That’s creepy! Come on, let’s go...” 
“Not before we’ve looked in the mirror.” 
Sophie pointed to the brass mirror hanging above the chest of 
drawers, just as before. “That’s really pretty!” said Joanna. 
“But it’s a magic mirror.” 
“Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all?” 
“I’m not kidding, Joanna. I am sure you can look in it and see 
something on the other side.” 
“Are you sure you’ve never been here before? And why is it so 
amusing to scare me all the time?” Sophie could not answer that one. 
“Sorry.” 
Now it was Joanna who suddenly discovered something lying 
on the floor in the corner. It was a small box. Joanna picked it up. 

--- PAGE 137 ---
138 
 
 
“Postcards,” she said. Sophie gasped. 
“Don’t touch them! Do you hear—don’t you dare touch them!” 
Joanna jumped. She threw the box down as if she had burnt 
herself. The postcards were strewn all over the floor. The next 
second she began to laugh. 
“They’re only postcards!” 
Joanna sat down on the floor and started to pick them up. After 
a while Sophie sat down beside her. 
“Lebanon ... Lebanon ... Lebanon ... They are all postmarked 
in Lebanon,” Joanna discovered. “I know,” said Sophie. 
Joanna sat bolt upright and looked Sophie in the eye. “So you 
have been here before!” 
“Yes, I guess I have.” 
It suddenly struck her that it would have been a whole lot easier 
if she had just admitted she had been here before. It couldn’t do any 
harm if she let her friend in on the mysterious things she had 
experienced during the last few days. 
“I didn’t want to tell you before we were here.” Joanna began 
to read the cards. 
“They are all addressed to someone called Hilde Moller Knag.” 
Sophie had not touched the cards yet. 
“What address?” 
Joanna read: “Hilde Moller Knag, c/o Alberto Knox, Lillesand, 
Norway.” 
Sophie breathed a sigh of relief. She was afraid they would say 
c/o Sophie Amundsen. She began to inspect them more closely. 
“April 28 ... May 4 ... May 6 ... May 9 ... They were stamped a 
few days ago.” 
“But there’s something else. All the postmarks are Norwegian! 
Look at that... UN Battalion ... the stamps are Norwegian too!” 
“I think that’s the way they do it. They have to be sort of 
neutral, so they have their own Norwegian post office down there.” 
“But how do they get the mail home?” “The air force, 
probably.” 
Sophie put the candlestick on the floor, and the two friends 
began to read the cards. Joanna arranged them in chronological 
order and read the first card: 

--- PAGE 138 ---
139 
 
 
Dear Hilde, 
 
I can’t wait to come home to Lillesand. I expect to land at 
Kjevik airport early evening on Midsummer Eve. I would much 
rather have arrived in time for your 15th birthday but I’m under mili- 
tary command of course. To make up for it, I promise to devote all 
my loving care to the huge present you are getting for your birthday. 
With love from someone who is always thinking about his 
daughter’s future. 
P.S. I’m sending a copy of this card to our mutual friend. I 
know you understand, Hilde. At the moment I’m being very 
secretive, but you will understand. 
 
Sophie picked up the next card: 
 
Dear Hilde, 
 
Down here we take one day at a time. If there is one thing I’m 
going to remember from these months in Lebanon, it’s all this 
waiting. But I’m doing what I can so you have as great a 15th 
birthday as possible. I can’t say any more at the moment. I’m 
imposing a severe censorship on myself. 
Love, Dad. 
 
The two friends sat breathless with excitement. Neither of them 
spoke, they just read what was written on the cards: 
My dear child, What I would like best would be to send you my 
secret thoughts with a white dove. 
But they are all out of white doves in Lebanon. If there is 
anything this war-torn country needs, it is white doves. I pray the 
UN will truly manage to make peace in the world some day. 
P.S. Maybe your birthday present can be shared with other 
people. Let’s talk about that when I get home. But you still have no 
idea what I’m talking about, right? Love from someone who has 
plenty of time to think for the both of us. 
 
When they had read six cards, there was only one left. It read: 

--- PAGE 139 ---
140 
 
 
 
Dear Hilde, 
 
I am now so bursting with all these secrets for your birthday 
that I have to stop myself several times a day from calling home and 
blowing the whole thing. It is something that simply grows and 
grows. And as you know, when a thing gets bigger and bigger it’s 
more difficult to keep it to yourself. 
 
Love from Dad. 
 
P.S. Some day you will meet a girl called Sophie. To give you 
both a chance to get to know more about each other before you meet, 
I have begun sending her copies of all the cards I send to you. I 
expect she will soon begin to catch on, Hilde. As yet she knows no 
more than you. She has a girlfriend called Joanna. Maybe she can 
be of help? 
 
After reading the last card, Joanna and Sophie sat quite still 
staring wildly at each other. Joanna was holding Sophie’s wrist in a 
tight grip. 
“I’m scared,” she said. “So am I.” 
“When was the last card stamped?” Sophie looked again at the 
card. “May 16,” she said. “That’s today.” 
“It can’t be!” cried Joanna, almost angrily. 
They examined the postmark carefully, but there was no 
mistaking it... 05-16-90. 
“It’s impossible,” insisted Joanna. “And I can’t imagine who 
could have written it. It must be someone who knows us. But how 
could they know we would come here on this particular day?” 
Joanna was by far the more scared of the two. The business 
with Hilde and her father was nothing new to Sophie. 
“I think it has something to do with the brass mirror.” Joanna 
jumped again. 
“You don’t actually think the cards come fluttering out of the 
mirror the minute they are stamped in Lebanon?” 
“Do you have a better explanation?” “No.” 

--- PAGE 140 ---
141 
 
 
Sophie got to her feet and held the candle up in front of the two 
portraits on the wall. Joanna came over and peered at the pictures. 
“Berkeley and Bjerkely. What does that mean?” 
“I have no idea.” 
The candle was almost burnt down. “Let’s go,” said Joanna. 
“Come on!” “We must just take the mirror with us.” 
Sophie reached up and unhooked the large brass mirror from 
the wall above the chest of drawers. 
Joanna tried to stop her but Sophie would not be deterred. 
When they got outside it was as dark as a May night can get. 
There was enough light in the sky for the clear outlines of bushes 
and trees to be visible. The small lake lay like a reflection of the sky 
above it. The two girls rowed pensively across to the other side. 
Neither of them spoke much on the way back to the tent, but 
each knew that the other was thinking intensely about what they had 
seen. Now and then a frightened bird would start up, and a couple 
of  times they heard the hooting of an owl. 
As soon as they reached the tent, they crawled into their 
bedrolls. Joanna refused to have the mirror inside the tent. Before 
they fell asleep, they agreed that it was scary enough, knowing it 
was just outside the tent flap. Sophie had also taken the postcards 
and put them in one of the pockets of her backpack. 
They woke early next morning. Sophie was up first. She put her 
boots on and went outside the tent. There lay the large mirror in the 
grass, covered with dew. 
Sophie wiped the dew off with her sweater and gazed down at 
her own reflection. It was as if she was looking down and up at 
herself at the same time. Luckily she found no early morning 
postcard from Lebanon. 
Above the broad clearing behind the tent a ragged morning mist 
was drifting slowly into little wads of cotton. Small birds were 
chirping energetically but Sophie could neither see nor hear any 
grouse. 
The girls put on extra sweaters and ate their breakfast outside 
the tent. Their conversation soon turned to the major’s cabin and the 
mysterious cards. 
After breakfast they folded up the tent and set off for home. 

--- PAGE 141 ---
142 
 
 
Sophie carried the large mirror under her arm. From time to time she 
had to rest—Joanna refused to touch it. 
As they approached the outskirts of the town they heard a few 
sporadic shots. Sophie recalled what Hilde’s father had written 
about war-torn Lebanon, and she realized how lucky she was to have 
been born in a peaceful country. The “shots” they heard came from 
innocent fireworks celebrating the national holiday. 
Sophie invited Joanna in for a cup of hot chocolate. Her mother 
was very curious to know where they had found the mirror. Sophie 
told her they had found it outside the major’s cabin, and her mother 
repeated the story about nobody having lived there for many years. 
When Joanna had gone, Sophie put on a red dress. The rest of 
the Norwegian national day passed quite normally. In the evening, 
the TV news had a feature on how the Norwegian UN battalion had 
celebrated the day in Lebanon. Sophie’s eyes were glued to the 
screen. One of the men she was seeing could be Hilde’s father. 
The last thing Sophie did on May 17 was to hang the large 
mirror on the wall in her room. The following morning there was a 
new brown envelope in the den. She tore it open at once and began 
to read. 
 
 

