--- PAGE 142 ---
143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two Cultures 
 
... the only way to avoid floating in a vacuum … 
 
It won’t be long now before we meet, my dear Sophie. I thought you 
would return to the major’s cabin—that’s why I left all the cards 
from Hilde’s father there. That was the only way they could be 
delivered to her. Don’t worry about how she will get them. A lot can 
happen before June 15. 
We have seen how the Hellenistic philosophers recycled the 
ideas of earlier philosophers. Some even attempted to turn their 
predecessors into religious prophets. Plotinus came close to 
acclaiming Plato as the savior of humanity. 
But as we know, another savior was born during the period we 
have just been discussing—and that happened outside the Greco-
Roman area. I refer to Jesus of Nazareth. In this chapter we will see 
how Christianity gradually began to permeate the Greco-Roman 
world—more or less the same way that Hilde’s world has gradually 
begun to permeate ours. 
Jesus was a jew, and the Jews belong to Semitic culture. The 
Greeks and the Romans belong to Indo-European culture. European 
civilization has its roots in both cultures. But before we take a closer 
look at the way Christianity influenced Greco-Roman culture, we 
must examine these roots. 
 
THE INDO-EUROPEANS 
By Indo-European we mean all the nations and cultures that use 
Indo-European languages. This covers all European nations except 

--- PAGE 143 ---
144 
 
 
those whose inhabitants speak one of the Finno-Ugrian languages 
(Lapp, Finnish, Estonian, and Hungarian) or Basque. In addition, 
most Indian and Iranian languages belong to the Indo-European 
family of languages. 
About 4,000 years ago, the primitive Indo-Europeans lived in 
areas bordering on the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea. From there, 
waves of these Indo-European tribes began to wander southeast into 
Iran and India, southwest to Greece, Italy, and Spain, westward 
through Central Europe to France and Britain, northwestward to 
Scandinavia and northward to Eastern Europe and Russia. Wherever 
they went, the Indo-Europeans assimilated with the local culture, 
although Indo-European languages and Indo-European religion 
came to play a dominant role. 
The ancient Indian Veda scriptures and Greek philosophy, and 
for that matter Snorri Sturluson’s mythology are all written in 
related languages. But it is not only the languages that are related. 
Related languages often lead to related ideas. This is why we usually 
speak of an Indo-European “culture.” 
The culture of the Indo-Europeans was influenced most of all 
by their belief in many gods. This is called polytheism. The names 
of these gods as well as much of the religious terminology recur 
throughout the whole Indo-European area. I’ll give you a few 
examples: 
The ancient Indians worshipped the celestial god Dyaus, which 
in Sanskrit means the sky, day, heaven/ Heaven. In Greek this god 
is called Zeus, in Latin, Jupiter (actually iov-pater, or “Father 
Heaven”), and in Old Norse, Tyr. So the names Dyaus, Zeus, lov, 
and Tyr are dialectal variants of the same word. 
You probably learned that the old Vikings believed in gods 
which they called Aser. This is another word we find recurring all 
over the Indo-European area. In Sanskrit, the ancient classical 
language of India, the gods are called asura and in Persian Ahura. 
Another word for “god” is deva in Sanskrit, claeva in Persian, deus 
in Latin and tivurr in Old Norse. 
In Viking times, people also believed in a special group of 
fertility gods (such as Niord, Freyr, and Freyja). These gods were 
referred to by a special collective name, vaner, a word that is related 

--- PAGE 144 ---
145 
 
 
to the Latin name for the goddess of fertility, Venus. Sanskrit has 
the related word vani, which means “desire.” 
There is also a clear affinity to be observed in some of the Indo-
European myths. In Snorri’s stories of the Old Norse gods, some of 
the myths are similar to the myths of India that were handed down 
from two to three thousand years earlier. Although Snorri’s myths 
reflect the Nordic environment and the Indian myths reflect the 
Indian, many of them retain traces of a common origin. We can see 
these traces most clearly in myths about immortal potions and the 
struggles of the gods against the monsters of chaos. 
We can also see clear similarities in modes of thought across 
the Indo-European cultures. A typical likeness is the way the world 
is seen as being the subject of a drama in which the forces of Good 
and Evil confront each other in a relentless struggle. Indo-Europeans 
have therefore often tried to “predict” how the battles between Good 
and Evil will turn out. 
One could say with some truth that it was no accident that 
Greek philosophy originated in the Indo-European sphere of culture. 
Indian, Greek, and Norse mythology all have obvious leanings 
toward a philosophic, or “speculative,” view of the world. 
The Indo-Europeans sought “insight” into the history of the 
world. We can even trace a particular word for “insight” or 
“knowledge” from one culture to another all over the Indo- 
European world. In Sanskrit it is vidya. The word is identical to the 
Greek word idea, which was so important in Plato’s philosophy. 
From Latin, we have the word video, but on Roman ground the word 
simply means to see. For us, “I see” can mean “I understand,” and 
in the cartoons, a light bulb can flash on above Woody 
Woodpecker’s head when he gets a bright idea. (Not until our own 
day did “seeing” become synonymous with staring at the TV 
screen.) In English we know the words wise and wisdom—in 
German, wissen (to know). Norwegian has the word viten, which 
has the same root as the Indian word vidya, the Greek idea, and the 
Latin video. 
All in all, we can establish that sight was the most important of 
the senses for Indo- Europeans. The literature of Indians, Greeks, 
Persians, and Teutons alike was characterized by great cosmic 

--- PAGE 145 ---
146 
 
 
visions. (There is that word again: “vision” comes from the Latin 
verb “video.”} It was also characteristic for Indo-European culture 
to make pictures and sculptures of the gods and of mythical events. 
Lastly, the Indo-Europeans had a cyc//c view of history. This 
is the belief that history goes in circles, just like the seasons of the 
year. There is thus no beginning and no end to history, but there are 
different civilizations that rise and fall in an eternal interplay 
between birth and death. 
Both of the two great Oriental religions, Hinduism and 
Buddhism, are Indo-European in origin. So is Greek philosophy, and 
we can see a number of clear parallels between Hinduism and 
Buddhism on the one hand and Greek philosophy on the other. Even 
today, Hinduism and Buddhism are strongly imbued with 
philosophical reflection. 
Not infrequently we find in Hinduism and Buddhism an 
emphasis on the fact that the deity is present in all things (pantheism) 
and that man can become one with God through religious insight. 
(Remember Plotinus, Sophie?) To achieve this requires the practice 
of deep self- communion or meditation. Therefore in the Orient, 
passivity and seclusion can be religious ideals. In ancient Greece, 
too, there were many people who believed in an ascetic, or 
religiously secluded, way of life for the salvation of the soul. Many 
aspects of medieval monastic life can be traced back to beliefs dating 
from the Greco-Roman civilization. 
Similarly, the transmigration of the soul, or the cycle of rebirth, 
is a fundamental belief in many Indo-European cultures. For more 
than 2,500 years, the ultimate purpose of life for every Indian has 
been the release from the cycle of rebirth. Plato also believed in the 
transmigration of the soul. 
 
The Semites 
Let us now turn to the Semites, Sophie. They belong to a 
completely different culture with a completely different language. 
The Semites originated in the Arabian Peninsula, but they also 
migrated to different parts of the world. The Jews lived far from 
their home for more than 2,000 years. Semitic history and religion 
reached furthest away from its roots by way of Christendom, 

--- PAGE 146 ---
147 
 
 
although Semitic culture also became widely spread via Islam. 
All three Western religions—Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam—share a Semitic background. The Muslims’ holy scripture, 
the Koran, and the Old Testament were both written in the Semitic 
family of languages. One of the Old Testament words for “god” has 
the same semantic root as the Muslim Allah. (The word “allah” 
means, quite simply, “god.”) 
When we get to Christianity the picture becomes more 
complicated. Christianity also has a Semitic background, but the 
New Testament was written in Greek, and when the Christian 
theology or creed was formulated, it was influenced by Greek and 
Latin, and thus also by Hellenistic philosophy. 
The Indo-Europeans believed in many different gods. It was 
just as characteristic for the Semites that from earliest times they 
were united in their belief in one God. This is called monotheism. 
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam all share the same fundamental idea 
that there is only one God. 
The Semites also had in common a linear view of history. In 
other words, history was seen as an ongoing line. In the beginning 
God created the world and that was the beginning of history. But 
one day history will end and that will be Judgment Day, when God 
judges the living and the dead. 
The role played by history is an important feature of these three 
Western religions. The belief is that God intervenes in the course of 
history—even that history exists in order that God may manifest his 
will in the world, just as he once led Abraham to the “Promised 
Land,” he leads mankind’s steps through history to the Day of 
Judgment. When that day comes, all evil in the world will be 
destroyed. 
With their strong emphasis on God’s activity in the course of 
history, the Semites were preoccupied with the writing of history for 
many thousands of years. And these historical roots constitute the 
very core of their holy scriptures. 
Even today the city of Jerusalem is a significant religious center 
for Jews, Christians, and Muslims alike. This indicates something of 
the common background of these three religions. 
The city comprises prominent (Jewish) synagogues, (Christian) 

--- PAGE 147 ---
148 
 
 
churches, and (Islamic) mosques. It is therefore deeply tragic that 
Jerusalem should have become a bone of contention—with people 
killing each other by the thousand because they cannot agree on who 
is to have ascendancy over this “Eternal City.” May the UN one day 
succeed in making Jerusalem a holy shrine for all three religions! 
(We shall not go any further into this more practical part of our 
philosophy course for the moment. We will leave it entirely to 
Hilde’s father. You must have gathered by now that he is a UN 
observer in Lebanon. To be more precise, I can reveal that he is 
serving as a major. If you are beginning to see some connection, 
that’s quite as it should be. On the other hand, let’s not anticipate 
events!) 
We said that the most important of the senses for Indo-
Europeans was sight. How important hearing was to the Semitic 
cultures is just as interesting. It is no accident that the Jewish creed 
begins with the words: “Hear, O Israel!” In the Old Testament we 
read how the people “heard” the word of the Lord, and the Jewish 
prophets usually began their sermons with the words: “Thus spake 
Jehovah (God).” 
“Hearing” the word of God is also emphasized in Christianity. 
The religious ceremonies of Christianity, Judaism, and Islam are all 
characterized by reading aloud or “reciting.” 
I also mentioned that the Indo-Europeans always made 
pictorial representations or sculptures of their gods. It was just as 
characteristic for the Semites that they never did. They were not 
supposed to create pictures or sculptures of God or the “deity.” The 
Old Testament commands that the people shall not make any image 
of God. This is still law today both for Judaism and Islam. Within 
Islam there is moreover a general aversion to both photography and 
art, because people should not compete with God in “creating” 
anything. 
But the Christian churches are full of pictures of Jesus and 
God, you are probably thinking. True enough, Sophie, but this 
is just one example of how Christendom was influenced by the 
Greco-Roman world. (In the Greek Orthodox Church—that is, 
in Greece and in Russia—“graven images,” or sculptures and 

--- PAGE 148 ---
149 
 
 
crucifixes, from Bible stories are still forbidden.) 
In contrast to the great religions of the Orient, the three Western 
religions emphasize that there is a distance between God and his 
creation. The purpose is not to be released from the cycle of rebirth, 
but to be redeemed from sin and blame. Moreover, religious life is 
characterized more by prayer, sermons, and the study of the 
scriptures than by self-communion and meditation. 
 
Israel 
 
I have no intention of competing with your religion teacher, 
Sophie, but let us just make a quick summary of Christianity’s 
Jewish background. 
It all began when God created the world. You can read how that 
happened on the very first page of the Bible. Then mankind began 
to rebel against God. Their punishment was not only that Adam and 
Eve were driven from the Garden of Eden—Death also came into 
the world. 
Man’s disobedience to God is a theme that runs right through 
the Bible. If we go further on in the Book of Genesis we read about 
the Flood and Noah’s Ark. Then we read that God made a covenant 
with Abraham and his seed. This covenant—or pact—was that 
Abraham and all his seed would keep the Lord’s commandments. In 
exchange God promised to protect all the children of Abraham. This 
covenant was renewed when Moses was given the Ten 
Commandments on Mount Sinai around the year 1200 B.C. At that 
time the Israelites had long been held as slaves in Egypt, but with 
God’s help they were led back to the land of Israel. 
About 1,000 years before Christ—and therefore long 
before there was anything called Greek philosophy—we hear 
of three great kings of Israel. The first was Saul, then came 
David, and after him came Solomon. Now all the Israelites 
were united in one kingdom, and under King David, 
especially, they experienced a period of political, military, and 
cultural glory. When kings were chosen, they were anointed 
by the people. They thus received the title Messiah, which means 

--- PAGE 149 ---
150 
 
 
“the anointed one.” In a religious sense kings were looked upon as 
a go-between between God and his people. The king could therefore 
also be called the “Son of God” and the country could be called the 
“Kingdom of God.” 
But before long Israel began to lose its power and the kingdom 
was divided into a Northern kingdom (Israel) and a Southern 
kingdom (Judea). In 722 B.C. the Northern kingdom was conquered 
by the Assyrians and it lost all political and religious significance. 
The Southern kingdom fared no better, being conquered by the 
Babylonians in 586 B.C. Its temple was destroyed and most of its 
people were carried off to slavery in Babylon. This “Babylonian 
captivity” lasted until 539 B.C. when the people were permitted to 
return to Jerusalem, and the great temple was restored. But for the 
rest of the period before the birth of Christ the Jews continued to 
live under foreign domination. 
The question Jews constantly asked themselves was why the 
Kingdom of David was destroyed and why catastrophe after 
catastrophe rained down on them, for God had promised to hold 
Israel in his hand. But the people had also promised to keep God’s 
commandments. It gradually became widely accepted that God was 
punishing Israel for her disobedience. 
From around 750 B.C. various prophets began to come forward 
preaching God’s wrath over Israel for not keeping his 
commandments. One day God would hold a Day of Judgment over 
Israel, they said. We call prophecies like these Doomsday 
prophecies. 
In the course of time there came other prophets who preached 
that God would redeem a chosen few of his people and send them a 
“Prince of Peace” or a king of the House of David. He would restore 
the old Kingdom of David and the people would have a future of 
prosperity. 
“The people that walked in darkness will see a great light,” said 
the prophet Isaiah, and “they that dwell in the land of the shadow of 
death, upon them hath the light shined.” We call prophecies like 
these prophecies of redemption. 
To sum up: The children of Israel lived happily under King 
David. But later on when their situation deteriorated, their prophets 

--- PAGE 150 ---
151 
 
 
began to proclaim that there would one day come a new king of the 
House of David. This “Messiah,” or “Son of God,” would “redeem” 
the people, restore Israel to greatness, and found a “Kingdom of 
God.” 
 
Jesus 
I assume you are still with me, Sophie? The key words are 
“Messiah,” “Son of God,” and “Kingdom of God.” At first it was all 
taken politically. In the time of Jesus, there were a lot of people who 
imagined that there would come a new “Messiah” in the sense of a 
political, military, and religious leader of the caliber of King David. 
This “savior” was thus looked upon as a national deliverer who 
would put an end to the suffering of the Jews under Roman 
domination. 
Well and good. But there were also many people who were 
more farsighted. For the past two hundred years there had been 
prophets who believed that the promised “Messiah” would be the 
savior of the whole world. He would not simply free the Israelites 
from a foreign yoke, he would save all mankind from sin and 
blame—and not least, from death. The longing for “salvation” in the 
sense of redemption was widespread all over the Hellenistic world. 
So along comes Jesus of Nazareth. He was not the only man 
ever to have come forward as the promised “Messiah.” Jesus also 
uses the words “Son of God,” the “Kingdom of God,” and 
“redemption.” In doing this he maintains the link with the old 
prophets. He rides into Jerusalem and allows himself to be 
acclaimed by the crowds as the savior of the people, thus playing 
directly on the way the old kings were installed in a characteristic 
“throne accession ritual.” He also allows himself to be anointed by 
the people. “The time is fulfilled,” he says, and “the Kingdom of 
God is at hand.” 
But here is a very important point: Jesus distinguished himself 
from the other “messiahs” by stating clearly that he was not a 
military or political rebel. His mission was much greater. He 
preached salvation and God’s forgiveness for everyone. To the 
people he met on his way he said “Your sins are forgiven you for his 
name’s sake.” 

--- PAGE 151 ---
152 
 
 
Handing out the “remission of sins” in this way was totally 
unheard of. And what was even worse, he addressed God as “Father” 
(Abba). This was absolutely unprecedented in the Jewish 
community at that time. It was therefore not long before there arose 
a wave of protest against him among the scribes. 
So here was the situation: a great many people at the time of 
Jesus were waiting for a Messiah who would reestablish the 
Kingdom of God with a great flourish of trumpets (in other words, 
with fire and sword). The expression “Kingdom of God” was indeed 
a recurring theme in the preachings of Jesus—but in a much broader 
sense. Jesus said that the “Kingdom of God” is loving thy neighbor, 
compassion for the weak and the poor, and forgiveness of those who 
have erred. 
This was a dramatic shift in the meaning of an age-old 
expression with warlike overtones. 
People were expecting a military leader who would soon 
proclaim the establishment of the Kingdom of God, and along 
comes Jesus in kirtle and sandals telling them that the Kingdom of 
God— or the “new covenant”—is that you must “love thy neighbor 
as thyself.” But that was not all, Sophie, he also said that we must 
love our enemies. When they strike us, we must not retaliate; we 
must even turn the other cheek. And we must forgive—not seven 
times but seventy times seven. 
Jesus himself demonstrated that he was not above talking to 
harlots, corrupt usurers, and the politically subversive. But he went 
even further: he said that a good-for-nothing who has squandered all 
his father’s inheritance— or a humble publican who has pocketed 
official funds— is righteous before God when he repents and prays 
for forgiveness, so great is God’s mercy. 
But hang on—he went a step further: Jesus said that such 
sinners were more righteous in the eyes of God and more deserving 
of God’s forgiveness than the spotless Pharisees who went around 
flaunting their virtue. 
Jesus pointed out that nobody can earn God’s mercy. We 
cannot redeem ourselves (as many of the Greeks believed). The 
severe ethical demands made by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount 
were not only to teach what the will of God meant, but also to show 

--- PAGE 152 ---
153 
 
 
that no man is righteous in the eyes of God. God’s mercy is 
boundless, but we have to turn to God and pray for his forgiveness. 
I shall leave a more thorough study of Jesus and his teachings 
to your religion teacher. He will have quite a task. I hope he will 
succeed in showing what an exceptional man Jesus was. In an 
ingenious way he used the language of his time to give the old war 
cries a totally new and broader content. It’s not surprising that he 
ended on the Cross. His radical tidings of redemption were at odds 
with so many interests and power factors that he had to be removed. 
When we talked about Socrates, we saw how dangerous it 
could be to appeal to people’s reason. With Jesus we see how 
dangerous it can be to demand unconditional brotherly love and 
unconditional forgiveness. Even in the world of today we can see 
how mighty powers can come apart at the seams when confronted 
with simple demands for peace, love, food for the poor, and amnesty 
for the enemies of the state. 
You may recall how incensed Plato was that the most righteous 
man in Athens had to forfeit his life. According to Christian 
teachings, Jesus was the only righteous person who ever lived. 
Nevertheless he was condemned to death. Christians say he died for 
the sake of humanity. This is what Christians usually call the 
“Passion” of Christ Jesus was the “suffering servant” who bore the 
sins of humanity in order that we could be “atoned” and saved from 
God’s wrath. 
 
Paul 
A few days after Jesus had been crucified and buried, rumors 
spread that he had risen from the grave. He thereby proved that he 
was no ordinary man. He truly was the “Son of God.” 
We could say that the Christian Church was founded on Easter 
Morning with the rumors of the resurrection of Jesus. This is already 
established by Paul: “And if Christ be not risen, then is our 
preaching vain and your faith is also vain.” 
Now all mankind could hope for the resurrection of the body, 
for it was to save us that Jesus was crucified. But, dear Sophie, 
remember that from a Jewish point of view there was no question of 
the “immortality of the soul” or any form of “transmigration”; that 

--- PAGE 153 ---
154 
 
 
was a Greek— and therefore an Indo-European—thought. 
According to Christianity there is nothing in man— no “soul,” for 
example— that is in itself immortal. Although the Christian Church 
believes in the “resurrection of the body and eternal life,” it is by 
God’s miracle that we are saved from death and “damnation.” It is 
neither through our own merit nor through any natural—or innate— 
ability. 
So the early Christians began to preach the “glad tidings” of 
salvation through faith in Jesus Christ. Through his mediation, the 
“Kingdom of God” was about to become a reality. Now the entire 
world could be won for Christ. (The word “christ” is a Greek 
translation of the Hebrew word “messiah,” the anointed one.) 
A few years after the death of Jesus, the Pharisee Paul 
converted to Christianity. 
Through his many missionary journeys across the whole of the 
Greco-Roman world he made Christianity a worldwide religion. We 
hear of this in the Acts of the Apostles. Paul’s preaching and 
guidance for the Christians is known to us from the many epistles 
written by him to the early Christian congregations. 
He then turns up in Athens. He wanders straight into the city 
square of the philosophic capital. And it is said that “his spirit was 
stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.” He 
visited the Jewish synagogue in Athens and conversed with 
Epicurean and Stoic philosophers. They took him up to the 
Areopagos hill and asked him: “May we know what this new 
doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is? For thou bringest certain 
strange things to our ears: we would know therefore what these 
things mean.” 
Can you imagine it, Sophie? A Jew suddenly appears in the 
Athenian marketplace and starts talking about a savior who was 
hung on a cross and later rose from the grave. Even from this visit 
of Paul in Athens we sense a coming collision between Greek 
philosophy and the doctrine of Christian redemption. But Paul 
clearly succeeds in getting the Athenians to listen to him. From the 
Areopagos—and beneath the proud temples of the Acropolis— he 
makes the following speech: 
“Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too 

--- PAGE 154 ---
155 
 
 
superstitious. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found 
an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom 
therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. 
God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he 
is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with 
hands; neither is worshipped with men’s hands, as though he needed 
any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things. And 
hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the 
face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, 
and the bounds of their habitation; that they should seek the Lord, if 
haply they might feel after him and find him, though he be not far 
from every one of us. For in him we live, and move, and have our 
being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also 
his offspring. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we 
ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or 
stone, graven by art and man’s device. And the times of this 
ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere 
to repent: 
Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the 
world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof 
he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from 
the dead.” 
Paul in Athens, Sophie! Christianity has begun to penetrate the 
Greco-Roman world as something else, something completely 
different from Epicurean, Stoic, or Neoplatonic philosophy. But 
Paul nevertheless finds some common ground in this culture. He 
emphasizes that the search for God is natural to all men. This was 
not new to the Greeks. But what was new in Paul’s preaching is that 
God has also revealed himself to mankind and has in truth reached 
out to them. So he is no longer a “philosophic God” that people can 
approach with their understanding. Neither is he “an image of gold 
or silver or stone”—there were plenty of those both on the Acropolis 
and down in the marketplace! He is a God that “dwelleth not in 
temples made with hands.” He is a personal God who intervenes in 
the course of history and dies on the Cross for the sake of mankind. 
When Paul had made his speech on the Areopagos, we read in 
the Acts of the Apostles, some mocked him for what he said about 

--- PAGE 155 ---
156 
 
 
the resurrection from the dead. But others said: “We will hear thee 
again of this matter.” There were also some who followed Paul and 
began to believe in Christianity. One of them, it is worth noting, was 
a woman named Damaris. Women were amongst the most fervent 
converts to Christianity. 
So Paul continued his missionary activities. A few decades 
after the death of Jesus, Christian congregations were already 
established in all the important Greek and Roman cities—in Athens, 
in Rome, in Alexandria, in Ephesos, and in Corinth. In the space of 
three to four hundred years, the entire Hellenistic world had become 
Christian. 
 
The Creed 
 
It was not only as a missionary that Paul came to have a 
fundamental significance for Christianity. He also had great 
influence within the Christian congregations. There was a 
widespread need for spiritual guidance. 
One important question in the early years after Jesus was 
whether non-Jews could become Christians without first becoming 
Jews. Should a Greek, for instance, observe the dietary laws? Paul 
believed it to be unnecessary. Christianity was more than a Jewish 
sect. It addressed itself to everybody in a universal message of 
salvation. The “Old Covenant” between God and Israel had been 
replaced by the “New Covenant” which Jesus had estab- lished 
between God and mankind. 
However, Christianity was not the only religion at that time. 
We have seen how Hellenism was influenced by a fusion of 
religions. It was thus vitally necessary for the church to step forward 
with a concise summary of the Christian doctrine, both in order to 
distance itself from other religions and to prevent schisms within the 
Christian Church. Therefore the first Creed was established, 
summing up the central Christian “dogmas” or tenets. 
One such central tenet was that Jesus was both God and 
man. He was not the “Son of God” on the strength of his 
actions alone. He was God himself. But he was also a “true 

--- PAGE 156 ---
157 
 
 
man” who had shared the misfortunes of mankind and actually 
suffered on the Cross. 
This may sound like a contradiction. But the message of the 
church was precisely that God became man. Jesus was not a 
“demigod” (which was half man, half god). Belief in such 
“demigods” was quite widespread in Greek and Hellenistic 
religions. The church taught that Jesus was “perfect God, perfect 
man.” 
 
Postscript 
 
Let me try to say a few words about how all this hangs together, 
my dear Sophie. As Christianity makes its entry into the Greco-
Roman world we are witnessing a dramatic meeting of two cultures. 
We are also seeing one of history’s great cultural revolutions. 
We are about to step out of antiquity. Almost one thousand 
years have passed since the days of the early Greek philosophers. 
Ahead of us we have the Christian Middle Ages, which also lasted 
for about a thousand years. 
The German poet Goethe once said that “he who cannot draw 
on three thousand years is living from hand to mouth.” I don’t want 
you to end up in such a sad state. I will do what I can  to acquaint 
you with your historical roots. It is the only way to become a human 
being. It is the only way to become more than a naked ape. It is the 
only way to avoid floating in a vacuum. 
“It is the only way to become a human being. It is the only way 
to become more than a naked ape ...” 
Sophie sat for a while staring into the garden through the little 
holes in the hedge. She was beginning to understand why it was so 
important to know about her historical roots. It had certainly been 
important to the Children of Israel. 
She herself was just an ordinary person. But if she knew her 
historical roots, she would be a little less ordinary. 
She would not be living on this planet for more than a few 
years. But if the history of mankind was her own history, in a way 
she was thousands of years old. 
 
 

--- PAGE 157 ---
158 
 
 
 
 
The Middle Ages 
 
... going only part of the way is not the same 
as going the wrong way… 
 
A week passed without Sophie hearing from Alberto Knox. There 
were no more postcards from Lebanon either, although she and 
Joanna still talked about the cards they found in the major’s cabin. 
Joanna had had the fright of her life, but as nothing further seemed 
to happen, the immediate terror faded and was submerged in 
homework and badminton. 
Sophie read Alberto’s letters over and over, looking for some 
clue that would throw light on the Hilde mystery. Doing so also gave 
her plenty of opportunity to digest the classical philosophy. She no 
longer had difficulty in distinguishing Democritus and Socrates, or 
Plato and Aristotle, from each other. 
On Friday, May 25, she was in the kitchen fixing dinner before 
her mother got home. It was their regular Friday agreement. Today 
she was making fish soup with fish balls and carrots. Plain and 
simple. 
Outside it was becoming windy. As Sophie stood stirring the 
casserole she turned toward the window. The birch trees were 
waving like cornstalks. 
Suddenly something smacked against the window-pane. 
Sophie turned around again and discovered a card sticking to the 
window. 
It was a postcard. She could read it through the glass: “Hilde 
Moller Knag, c/o Sophie Amundsen.” 
She thought as much! She opened the window and took the 
card. It could hardly have blown all the way from Lebanon! 
This card was also dated June 15. Sophie removed the casserole 
from the stove and sat down at the kitchen table. The card read: 
Dear Hilde, I don’t know whether it will still be your birthday 
when you read this card. I hope so, in a way; or at least that not too 

--- PAGE 158 ---
159 
 
 
many days have gone by. A week or two for Sophie does not have 
to mean just as long for us. I shall be coming home for Midsummer 
Eve, so we can sit together for hours in the glider, looking out over 
the sea, Hilde. We have so much to talk about. Love from Dad, who 
sometimes gets very depressed about the thousand-year-long strife 
between Jews, Christians, and Muslims. I have to keep reminding 
myself that all three religions stem from Abraham. So I suppose they 
all pray to the same God. Down here, Cain and Abel have not 
finished killing each other. 
P.S. Please say hello to Sophie. Poor child, she still doesn’t 
know how this whole thing hangs together. But perhaps you do? 
Sophie put her head down on the table, exhausted. One thing 
was certain—she had no idea how this thing hung together. But 
Hilde did, presumably. 
If Hilde’s father asked her to say hello to Sophie, it had to mean 
that Hilde knew more about Sophie than Sophie did about Hilde. It 
was all so complicated that Sophie went back to fixing dinner. 
A postcard that smacked against the kitchen window all by 
itself! You could call that airmail! As soon as she had set the 
casserole on the stove again, the telephone rang. 
Suppose it was Dad! She wished desperately that he would 
come home so she could tell him everything that had happened in 
these last weeks. But it was probably only Joanna or Mom. Sophie 
snatched up the phone. 
“Sophie Amundsen,” she said. “It’s me,” said a voice. 
Sophie was sure of three things: it was not her father. But it was 
a man’s voice, and a voice she knew she had heard before. 
“Who is this?” “It’s Alberto.” “Ohhh!” 
Sophie was at a loss for words. It was the voice from the 
Acropolis video that she had recognized. “Are you all right?” 
“Sure.” 
“From now on there will be no more letters.” “But I didn’t send 
you a frog!” 
“We must meet in person. It’s beginning to be urgent, you see.” 
“Why?” 
“Hilde’s father is closing in on us.” “Closing in how?” 
“On all sides, Sophie. We have to work together now.” 

--- PAGE 159 ---
160 
 
 
“How...?” 
“But you can’t help much before I have told you about the 
Middle Ages. We ought to cover the Renaissance and the 
seventeenth century as well. Berkeley is a key figure...” 
“Wasn’t he the man in the picture at the major’s cabin?” 
“That very same. Maybe the actual struggle will be waged over 
his philosophy.” “You make it sound like a war.” 
“I would rather call it a battle of wills. We have to attract 
Hilde’s attention and get her over on our side before her father 
comes home to Lillesand.” 
“I don’t get it at all.” 
“Perhaps the philosophers can open your eyes. Meet me at St. 
Mary’s Church at eight o’clock tomorrow morning. But come alone, 
my child.” 
“So early in the morning?” The telephone clicked. “Hello?” 
He had hung up! Sophie rushed back to the stove just before 
the fish soup boiled over. 
St. Mary’s Church? That was an old stone church from the 
Middle Ages. It was only used for concerts and very special 
ceremonies. And in the summer it was sometimes open to tourists. 
But surely it wasn’t open in the middle of the night? 
When her mother got home, Sophie had put the card from 
Lebanon with everything else from Alberto and Hilde. After dinner 
she went over to Joanna’s place. 
“We have to make a very special arrangement,” she said as 
soon as her friend opened the door. She said no more until Joanna 
had closed her bedroom door. 
“It’s rather problematic,” Sophie went on. “Spit it out!” 
“I’m going to have to tell Mom that I’m staying the night here.” 
“Great!” 
“But it’s only something I’m saying, you see. I’ve got to go 
somewhere else.” “That’s bad. Is it a guy?” 
“No, it’s to do with Hilde.” 
Joanna whistled softly, and Sophie looked her severely in the 
eye. 
“I’m coming over this evening,” she said, “but at seven o’clock 
I’ve got to sneak out again. 

--- PAGE 160 ---
161 
 
 
You’ve got to cover for me until I get back.” 
“But where are you going? What is it you have to do?” “Sorry. 
My lips are sealed.” 
Sleepovers were never a problem. On the contrary, almost. 
Sometimes Sophie got the impression that her mother enjoyed 
having the house to herself. 
“You’ll be home for breakfast, I suppose?” was her mother’s 
only remark as Sophie left the house. “If I’m not, you know where I 
am.” 
What on earth made her say that? It was the one weak spot. 
Sophie’s visit began like any other sleepover, with talk until 
late into the night. The only difference was that when they finally 
settled down to sleep at about two o’clock, Sophie set the alarm 
clock to a quarter to seven. 
Five hours later, Joanna woke briefly as Sophie switched off 
the buzzer. “Take care,” she mumbled. 
Then Sophie was on her way. St. Mary’s Church lay on the 
outskirts of the old part of town. It was several miles walk away, but 
even though she had only slept for a few hours she felt wide awake. 
It was almost eight o’clock when she stood at the entrance to 
the old stone church. Sophie tried the massive door. It was unlocked! 
Inside the church it was as deserted and silent as the church was 
old. A bluish light filtered in through the stained-glass windows 
revealing a myriad of tiny particles of dust hovering in the air. The 
dust seemed to gather in thick beams this way and that inside the 
church. Sophie sat on one of the benches in the center of the nave, 
staring toward the altar at an old crucifix painted with muted colors. 
Some minutes passed. Suddenly the organ began to play. 
Sophie dared not look around. It sounded like an ancient hymn, 
probably from the Middle Ages. 
There was silence again. Then she heard footsteps approaching 
from behind her. Should she look around? She chose instead to fix 
her eyes on the Cross. 
The footsteps passed her on their way up the aisle and she saw 
a figure dressed in a brown monk’s habit. Sophie could have sworn 
it was a monk right out of the Middle Ages. 
She was nervous, but not scared out of her wits. In front of the 

